“THE LORD OF THE RINGS' 










Complete Table of Contents 











3. Of the Ordering of the Shire 










Chapter 1 








Chapter 10 







Three is Company 





Fog on the Barrow-Downs 




Flight to the Ford 












Chapter 8 








A Journey in the Dark 





The Great River 










Chapter 4 










The Departure of Boromir 









The King of the Golden Hall 









The Palantnr 











Chapter 8 







The Black Gate is Closed 



Journey to the Cross-roads 









Chapter 1 








Chapter 10 









The Siege of Gondor 







The Houses of Healing 










Chapter 3 










The Land of Shadow 




Homeward Bound 










This tale grew in the telling, until it became a history of the Great 
War of the Ring and included many glimpses of the yet more ancient history 

its publication in 1937; but I did not go on with this sequel, for I wished 
first to complete and set in order the mythology and legends of the Elder 
Days, which had then been taking shape for some years. I desired to do this 

interested in this work, especially since it was primarily linguistic in 
inspiration and was begun in order to provide the necessary background of 


When those whose advice and opinion I sought corrected little hope to 
no hope, I went back to the sequel, encouraged by requests from readers for 
more information concerning hobbits and their adventures. But the story was 

were, of its end and passing away before its beginning and middle had been 
told. The process had begun in the writing of The Hobbit, in which there 
were already some references to the older matter: Elrond, Gondolin, the 

things higher or deeper or darker than its surface: Durin, Moria, Gandalf, 
the Necromancer, the Ring. The discovery of the significance of these 

Age and its culmination in the War of the Ring. 

Those who had asked for more information about hobbits eventually got 

Rings went on at intervals during the years 1936 to 1949, a period in which 
I had many duties that I did not neglect, and many other interests as a 
learner and teacher that often absorbed me. The delay was, of course, also 
increased by the outbreak of war in 1939, by the end of which year the tale 

next five years I found that the story could not now be wholly abandoned, 
and I plodded on, mostly by night, till I stood by Balin's tomb in Moria. 
There I halted for a long while. It was almost a year later when I went on 





I wrote the first drafts of the matter that now stands as Book Three, and 
the beginnings of chapters I and III of Book Five; and there as the beacons 
flared in Anurien and Thjoden came to Harrowdale I stopped. Foresight had 


It was during 1944 that, leaving the loose ends and perplexities of a 
war which it was my task to conduct, or at least to report, 1 forced myself 

become Book Four, were written and sent out as a serial to my son, 
Christopher, then in South Africa with the RAF. Nonetheless it took another 

changed my house, my chair, and my college, and the days though less dark 
were no less laborious. Then when the ’end’ had at last been reached the 
whole story had to be revised, and indeed largely re-written backwards. And 
it had to be typed, and re-typed: by me; the cost of professional typing by 


The Lord of the Rings has been read by many people since it finally 

the many opinions or guesses that I have received or have read concerning 
the motives and meaning of the tale. The prime motive was the desire of a 
tale-teller to try his hand at a really long story that would hold the 

them or deeply move them. As a guide I had only my own feelings for what is 
appealing or moving, and for many the guide was inevitably often at fault. 
Some who have read the book, or at any rate have reviewed it, have found it 

have similar opinions of their works, or of the kinds of writing that they 
evidently prefer. But even from the points of view of many who have enjoyed 
my story there is much that fails to please. It is perhaps not possible in a 

the same points; for I find from the letters that I have received that the 
passages or chapters that are to some a blemish are all by others specially 
approved. The most critical reader of all, myself, now finds many defects, 
minor and major, but being fortunately under no obligation either to review 

one that has been noted by others: the book is too short. 

As for any inner meaning or 'message', it has in the intention of the 





down roots (into the past) and threw out unexpected branches: but its main 
theme was settled from the outset by the inevitable choice of the Ring as 
the link between it and The Hobbit. The crucial chapter, "The Shadow of the 

the foreshadow of 1939 had yet become a threat of inevitable disaster, and 
from that point the story would have developed along essentially the same 
lines, if that disaster had been averted. Its sources are things long before 

modified by the war that began in 1939 or its sequels. 

The real war does not resemble the legendary war in its process or its 
conclusion. If it had inspired or directed the development of the legend, 

would not have been annihilated but enslaved, and Barad-dyr would not have 
been destroyed but occupied. Saruman, failing to get possession of the Ring, 
would m the confusion and treacheries of the time have found in Mordor the 

have made a Great Ring of his own with which to challenge the self-styled 
Ruler of Middle-earth. In that conflict both sides would have held hobbits 
in hatred and contempt: they would not long have survived even as slaves. 


those who like allegory or topical reference. But I cordially dislike 
allegory in all its manifestations, and always have done so since I grew old 
and wary enough to detect its presence. I much prefer history, true or 

readers. I think that many confuse 'applicability' with 'allegory'; but the 
one resides in the freedom of the reader, and the other in the purposed 


An author cannot of course remain wholly unaffected by his experience, 
but the ways in which a story-germ uses the soil of experience are extremely 

evidence that is inadequate and ambiguous. It is also false, though 
naturally attractive, when the lives of an author and critic have 

common to both were necessarily the most powerful influences. One has 


personally to come under the shadow of war to feel fully its oppression; but 
as the years go by it seems now often forgotten that to be caught in youth 




by 1914 was no less hideous an experience than to be involved in 1939 and 

to take a less grievous matter: it has been supposed by some that The 
Scouring of the Shire’ reflects the situation in England at the time when I 
was finishing my tale. It does not. It is an essential part of the plot, 

Saruman as developed in the story without, need I say, any allegorical 
significance or contemporary political reference whatsoever. It has indeed 
some basis in experience, though slender (for the economic situation was 

childhood was being shabbily destroyed before I was ten, in days when 
motor-cars were rare objects (I had never seen one) and men were still 
building suburban railways. Recently I saw in a paper a picture of the last 

seemed to me so important. I never liked the looks of the Young miller, but 
his father, the Old miller, had a black beard, and he was not named 



opportunity has been taken of revising it. A number of errors and 
inconsistencies that still remained in the text have been corrected, and an 
attempt has been made to provide information on a few points which attentive 

if some seem to have been passed over that may be because I have failed to 
keep my notes in order; but many enquiries could only be answered by 
additional appendices, or indeed by the production of an accessory volume 

edition, in particular more detailed linguistic information. In the meantime 
this edition offers this Foreword, an addition to the Prologue, some notes, 
and an index of the names of persons and places. This index is in intention 

has been necessary to reduce its bulk. A complete index, making full use of 
the material prepared for me by Mrs. N. Smith, belongs rather to the 









1. Concerning Hobbits 




reader may discover much of their character and a little of their history. 
Further information will also be found in the selection from the Red Book of 
Westmarch that has already been published, under the title of The Hobbit. 

by Bilbo himself, the first Hobbit to become famous in the world at large, 
and called by him There and Back Again, since they told of his journey into 
the East and his return: an adventure which later involved all the Hobbits 


Many, however, may wish to know more about this remarkable people 


the outset, while some may not possess the earlier book. For such readers a 

and the first adventure is briefly recalled. 

Hobbits are an unobtrusive but very ancient people, more numerous 

earth: a well-ordered and well-farmed countryside was their favourite haunt. 
They do not and did not understand or like machines more complicated than a 
forge -bellows, a water-mill, or a hand-loom, though they were skilful with 

they call us, and now they avoid us with dismay and are becoming hard to 
find. They are quick of hearing and sharp-eyed, and though they are inclined 
to be fat and do not hurry unnecessarily, they are nonetheless nimble and 

disappearing swiftly and silently, when large folk whom they do not wish to 
meet come blundering by; and this an they have developed until to Men it may 
seem magical. But Hobbits have never, in fact, studied magic of any kind, 

and practice, and a close friendship with the earth, have rendered 




inimitable by bigger and clumsier races. 


stocky, that is, even when they are not actually much shorter. Their height 
is variable, ranging between two and four feet of our measure. They seldom 
now reach three feet; but they hive dwindled, they say, and in ancient days 

son of Isengrim the Second, was four foot five and able to ride a horse. He 
was surpassed in all Hobbit records only by two famous characters of old; 


As for the Hobbits of the Shire, with whom these tales are concerned, 
in the days of their peace and prosperity they were a merry folk. They 
dressed in bright colours, being notably fond of yellow and green; but they 

in a thick curling hair, much like the hair of their heads, which was 
commonly brown. Thus, the only craft little practised among them was 
shoe-making; but they had long and skilful fingers and could make many other 

than beautiful, broad, bright-eyed, red-cheeked, with mouths apt to 
laughter, and to eating and drinking. And laugh they did, and eat, and 

six meals a day (when they could get them). They were hospitable and 
delighted in parties, and in presents, which they gave away freely and 


It is plain indeed that in spite of later estrangement Hobbits are 
relatives of ours: far nearer to us than Elves, or even than Dwarves. Of old 

disliked much the same things as Men did. But what exactly our relationship 
is can no longer be discovered. The beginning of Hobbits lies far back in 

preserve any records of that vanished time, and their traditions are 
concerned almost entirely with their own history, in which Men appear seldom 
and Hobbits are not mentioned at all. Yet it is clear that Hobbits had, in 

became even aware of them. And the world being after all full of strange 
creatures beyond count, these little people seemed of very little 
importance. But in the days of Bilbo, and of Frodo his heir, they suddenly 





the counsels of the Wise and the Great. 

Those days, the Third Age of Middle -earth, are now long past, and the 

lived were doubtless the same as those in which they still linger: the 
North-West of the Old World, east of the Sea. Of their original home the 
Hobbits in Bilbo's time preserved no knowledge. A love of learning (other 

still a few in the older families who studied their own books, and even 
gathered reports of old times and distant lands from Elves, Dwarves, and 
Men. Their own records began only after the settlement of the Shire, and 

Days. It is clear, nonetheless, from these legends, and from the evidence of 
their peculiar words and customs, that like many other folk Hobbits had in 
the distant past moved westward. Their earliest tales seem to glimpse a time 



the Great and the Misty Mountains. Why they later undertook the hard and 
perilous crossing of the mountains into Eriador is no longer certain. Their 
own accounts speak of the multiplying of Men in the land, and of a shadow 

Mirkwood. 


divided into three somewhat different breeds: Harfoots, Stoors, and 
Fallohides. The Harfoots were browner of skin, smaller, and shorter, and 

and they preferred highlands and hillsides. The Stoors were broader, heavier 
in build; their feet and hands were larger, and they preferred flat lands 
and riversides. The Fallohides were fairer of skin and also of hair, and 

of woodlands. 


lived in the foothills of the mountains. They moved westward early, and 
roamed over Eriador as far as Weathertop while the others were still in the 
Wilderland. They were the most normal and representative variety of Hobbit, 

place, and longest preserved their ancestral habit of living in tunnels and 





The Stoors lingered long by the banks of the Great River Anduin, and 
were less shy of Men. They came west after the Harfoots and followed the 

between Tharbad and the borders of Dunland before they moved north again. 

The Fallohides, the least numerous, were a northerly branch. They were 
more friendly with Elves than the other Hobbits were, and had more skill in 

tilling. They crossed the mountains north of Rivendell and came down the 
River Hoarwell. In Eriador they soon mingled with the other kinds that had 
preceded them, but being somewhat bolder and more adventurous, they were 

in Bilbo's time the strong Fallohidish strain could still be noted among the 
greater families, such as the Tooks and the Masters of Buckland. 


Mountains of Lune, the Hobbits found both Men and Elves. Indeed, a remnant 
still dwelt there of the D®nedain, the kings of Men that came over the Sea 
out of Westernesse; but they were dwindling fast and the lands of their 
North Kingdom were falling far and wide into waste. There was room and to 

communities. Most of their earlier settlements had long disappeared and been 
forgotten in Bilbo's time; but one of the first to become important still 
endured, though reduced in size; this was at Bree and in the Chetwood that 


It was in these early days, doubtless, that the Hobbits learned their 
letters and began to write after the manner of the D®nedain, who had in 

also they forgot whatever languages they had used before, and spoke ever 
after the Common Speech, the Westron as it was named, that was current 

coasts of the Sea from B elf alas to Lune. Yet they kept a few words of their 
own, as well as their own names of months and days, and a great store of 


About this time legend among the Hobbits first becomes history with a 
reckoning of years. For it was in the one thousand six hundred and first 
year of the Third Age that the Fallohide brothers, Marcho and Blanco, set 

Fornostl, they crossed the brown river Baranduin with a great following of 




Hobbits. They passed over the Bridge of Stonebows, that had been built in 
the days of the power of the North Kingdom, and they took ail the land 

demanded of them was that they should keep the Great Bridge in repair, and 
all other bridges and roads, speed the king's messengers, and acknowledge 


Thus began the Shire-reckoning, for the year of the crossing of the 

and all later dates were reckoned from it. 2 At once the western Hobbits fell 
in love with their new land, and they remained there, and soon passed once 
more out of the history of Men and of Elves. While there was still a king 

chieftains and meddled not at all with events in the world outside. To the 
last battle at Fornost with the Witch-lord of Angmar they sent some bowmen 
to the aid of the king, or so they maintained, though no tales of Men record 

land for their own, and they chose from their own chiefs a Thain to hold the 
authority of the king that was gone. There for a thousand years they were 
little troubled by wars, and they prospered and multiplied after the Dark 

followed it. Many thousands then perished, but the Days of Dearth (1158-60) 
were at the time of this tale long past and the Hobbits had again become 
accustomed to plenty. The land was rich and kindly, and though it had long 

there the king had once had many farms, cornlands, vineyards, and woods. 

Forty leagues it stretched from the Far Downs to the Brandywine Bridge, 
and fifty from the northern moors to the marshes in the south. The Hobbits 

district of well-ordered business; and there in that pleasant comer of the 
world they plied their well-ordered business of living, and they heeded less 
and less the world outside where dark things moved, until they came to think 
that peace and plenty were the rule in Middle-earth and the right of all 

Guardians, and of the labours of those that made possible the long peace of 
the Shire. They were, in fact, sheltered, but they had ceased to remember 


At no time had Hobbits of any kind been warlike, and they had never 





obliged to fight to maintain themselves in a hard world; but in Bilbo's time 
that was very ancient history. The last battle, before this story opens, and 
indeed the only one that had ever been fought within the borders of the 

which Bandobras Took routed an invasion of Ores. Even the weathers had 


milder, and the wolves that had once come ravening out of the North in 
bitter white winters were now only a grandfather's tale. So, though there 

trophies, hanging above hearths or on walls, or gathered into the museum at 
Michel Delving. The Mathom-house it was called; for anything that Hobbits 
had no immediate use for, but were unwilling to throw away, they called a 



many of the presents that passed from hand to hand were of that son. 

Nonetheless, ease and peace had left this people still curiously tough. 

They were, if it came to it, difficult to daunt or to kill; and they were, 

when put to it, do without them, and could survive rough handling by grief, 
foe, or weather in a way that astonished those who did not know them well 
and looked no further than their bellies and their well-fed faces. Though 

at bay, and at need could still handle arms. They shot well with the bow, 
for they were keen-eyed and sure at the mark. Not only with bows and arrows. 
If any Hobbit stooped for a stone, it was well to get quickly under cover, 


All Hobbits had originally lived in holes in the ground, or so they 
believed, and in such dwellings they still felt most at home; but in the 

in the Shire in Bilbo's days it was, as a rule, only the richest and the 
poorest Hobbits that maintained the old custom. The poorest went on living 
in burrows of the most primitive kind, mere holes indeed, with only one 

versions of the simple diggings of old. But suitable sites for these large 
and ramifying tunnels (or smicils as they called them) were not everywhere to 
be found; and in the flats and the low-lying districts the Hobbits, as they 





and the older villages, such as Hobbiton or Tuckborough, or in the chief 
township of the Shire, Michel Delving on the White Downs, there were now 
many houses of wood, brick, or stone. These were specially favoured by 

when they had holes to live in. Hobbits had long been accustomed to build 


The habit of building farmhouses and barns was said to have begun among 
the inhabitants of the Marish down by the Brandywine. The Hobbits of that 
quarter, the Eastfarthing, were rather large and heavy-legged, and they wore 

large part of their blood, as indeed was shown by the down that many grew on 
their chins. No Harfoot or Fallohide had any trace of a beard. Indeed, the 
folk of the Marish, and of Buckland, east of the River, which they 

south-away; and they still had many peculiar names and strange words not 


It is probable that the craft of building, as many other crafts beside, 
was derived from the D®nedain. But the Hobbits may have learned it direct 
from the Elves, the teachers of Men in their youth. For the Elves of the 

time at the Grey Havens away to the west, and in other places within reach 
of the Shire. Three Elf-towers of immemorial age were still to be seen on 
the Tower Hills beyond the western marches. They shone far off in the 

The Hobbits of the Westfarthing said that one could see the Sea from the lop 
of that tower; but no Hobbit had ever been known to climb it. Indeed, few 
Hobbits had ever seen or sailed upon the Sea, and fewer still had ever 

with deep misgivings, and not many of them could swim. And as the days of 
the Shire lengthened they spoke less and less with the Elves, and grew 
afraid of them, and distrustful of those that had dealings with them; and 

turned their faces away from the hills in the west. 

The craft of building may have come from Elves or Men, but the Hobbits 

were usually long, low, and comfortable. The oldest kind were, indeed, no 




more than built imitations of smials, thatched with dry grass or straw, or 
roofed with turves, and having walls somewhat bulged. That stage, however, 

been altered, improved by devices, learned from Dwarves, or discovered by 
themselves. A preference for round windows, and even round doors, was the 
chief remaining peculiarity of hobbit-architecture. 


inhabited by large families. (Bilbo and Frodo Baggins were as bachelors very 
exceptional, as they were also in many other ways, such as their friendship 
with the Elves.) Sometimes, as in the case of the Tooks of Great Smials, or 

(comparative) peace together in one ancestral and many -tunnelled mansion. 
All Hobbits were, in any case, clannish and reckoned up their relationships 
with great care. They drew long and elaborate family -trees with innumerable 

to whom, and in what degree. It would be impossible in this book to set out 
a family -tree that included even the more important members of the more 
important families at the time which these tales tell of. The genealogical 

themselves, and all but Hobbits would find them exceedingly dull. Hobbits 
delighted in such things, if they were accurate: they liked to have books 
filled with things that they already knew, set out fair and square with no 









There is another astonishing thing about Hobbits of old that must be 

clay or wood, the smoke of the burning leaves of a herb, which they called 
pipe-weed or leaf, a variety probably of Nicotiana. A great deal of mystery 
surrounds the origin of this peculiar custom, or 'art' as the Hobbits 

put together by Meriadoc Brandybuck (later Master of Buckland), and since he 
and the tobacco of the Southfarthing play a part in the history that 
follows, his remarks in the introduction to his Herblore of the Shire may be 


’This,' he says, 'is the one art that we can certainly claim to be our 

legends and family histories take it for granted; for ages folk in the Shire 
smoked various herbs, some fouler, some sweeter. But all accounts agree that 
Tobold Hornblower of Longbottom in the Southfarthing first grew the true 

1070 of Shire-reckoning. The best home-grown still comes from that district, 
especially the varieties now known as Longbottom Leaf, Old Toby, and 


'How Old Toby came by the plant is not recorded, for to his dying day 
he would not tell. He knew much about herbs, but he was no traveller. It is 

further from the Shire than that. It is thus quite possible that he learned 
of this plant in Bree, where now, at any rate, it grows well on the south 
slopes of the hill. The Bree-hobbits claim to have been the first actual 

before the people of the Shire, whom they refer to as "colonists"; but in 
this case their claim is, I think, likely to be true. And certainly it was 
from Bree that the art of smoking the genuine weed spread in the recent 

as still passed to and fro through that ancient road-meeting. The home and 
centre of the an is thus to be found in the old inn of Bree, The Prancing 




Pony, that has been kept by the family of Butterbur from time beyond record. 


south have convinced me that the weed itself is not native to our parts of 
the world, but came northward from the lower Anduin, whither it was, I 
suspect, originally brought over Sea by the Men of Westernesse. It grows 

where it is never found wild, and flourishes only in warm sheltered places 
like Longbottom. The Men of Gondor call it sweet galenas, and esteem it only 
for the fragrance of its flowers. From that land it must have been carried 

our own day. But even the D®nedain of Gondor allow us this credit: Hobbits 
first put it into pipes. Not even the Wizards first thought of that before 
we did. Though one Wizard that I knew took up the art long ago, and became 





3. Of the Ordering of the Shire 




referred to. North, South, East, and West; and these again each into a 
number of folklands, which still bore the names of some of the old leading 
families, although by the time of this history these names were no longer 

Tookland, but that was not true of many other families, such as the 
Bagginses or the Boffins. Outside the Farthings were the East and West 

Westmarch added to the Shire in S.R. 1462. 

The Shire at this time had hardly any 'government'. Families for the 

most of their time. In other matters they were, as a rule, generous and not 
greedy, but contented and moderate, so that estates, farms, workshops, and 


There remained, of course, the ancient tradition concerning the high 
king at Fornost, or Norbury as they called it, away north of the Shire. But 
there had been no king for nearly a thousand years, and even the ruins of 

folk and wicked things (such as trolls) that they had not heard of the king. 

For they attributed to the king of old all their essential laws; and usually 
they kept the laws of free will, because they were The Rules (as they said), 


It is true that the Took family had long been pre-eminent; for the 

before, and the chief Took had borne that title ever since. The Thain was 
the master of the Shire-moot, and captain of the Shire-muster and the 
Hobbitry-in-arms, but as muster and moot were only held in times of 

than a nominal dignity. The Took family was still, indeed, accorded a 
special respect, for it remained both numerous and exceedingly wealthy, and 
was liable to produce in every generation strong characters of peculiar 





now rather tolerated (in the rich) than generally approved. The custom 
endured, nonetheless, of referring to the head of the family as The Took, 
and of adding to his name, if required, a number: such as Isengrim the 



Michel Delving (or of the Shire), who was elected every seven years at the 
Free Fair on the White Downs at the Lithe, that is at Midsummer. As mayor 
almost his only duty was to preside at banquets, given on the 

Postmaster and First Shirriff were attached to the mayoralty, so that he 
managed both the Messenger Service and the Watch. These were the only 
Shire-services, and the Messengers were the most numerous, and much the 

wrote constantly to all their friends (and a selection of their relations) 
who lived further off than an afternoon's walk. 


the nearest equivalent that they possessed. They had, of course, no uniforms 
(such things being quite unknown), only a feather in their caps; and they 
were in practice rather haywards than policemen, more concerned with the 

of them, three in each Farthing, for Inside Work. A rather larger body, 
varying at need, was employed to 'beat the bounds’, and to see that 



had been greatly increased. There were many reports and complaints of 
strange persons and creatures prowling about the borders, or over them: the 

except in tales and legends of long ago. Few heeded the sign, and not even 
Bilbo yet had any notion of what it portended. Sixty years had passed since 
he set out on his memorable journey, and he was old even for Hobbits, who 

considerable wealth that he had brought back. How much or how little he 
revealed to no one, not even to Frodo his favourite 'nephew'. And he still 





4. Of the Finding of the Ring 




Wizard, Gandalf the Grey, and thirteen dwarves with him: none other, indeed, 
than Thorin Oakenshield, descendant of kings, and his twelve companions in 
exile. With them he set out, to his own lasting astonishment, on a morning 
of April, it being then the year 1341 Shire-reckoning, on a quest of great 

in Dale, far off in the East. The quest was successful, and the Dragon that 
guarded the hoard was destroyed. Yet, though before all was won the Battle 
of Five Armies was fought, and Thorin was slain, and many deeds of renown 

more than a note in the long annals of the Third Age, but for an 'accident' 
by the way. The party was assailed by Ores in a high pass of the Misty 
Mountains as they went towards Wilderland; and so it happened that Bilbo was 

as he groped in vain in the dark, he put his hand on a ring, lying on the 
floor of a tunnel. Ele put it in his pocket. It seemed then like mere luck. 

Trying to find his way out. Bilbo went on down to the roots of the 

cold lake far from the light, and on an island of rock in the water lived 
Gollum. He was a loathsome little creature: he paddled a small boat with his 
large flat feet, peering with pale luminous eyes and catching blind fish 

ore, if he could catch it and strangle it without a struggle. He possessed a 
secret treasure that had come to him long ages ago, when he still lived in 
the light: a ring of gold that made its wearer invisible. It was the one 

with him. For he kept it hidden safe in a hole on his island, except when he 
was hunting or spying on the ores of the mines. 


when they met; but it was not, and the hobbit held in his hand an Elvish 
knife, which served him as a sword. So to gain time Gollum challenged Bilbo 
to the Riddle-game, saying that if he asked a riddle which Bilbo could not 




guess, then he would kill him and eat him; but if Bilbo defeated him, then 


Since he was lost in the dark without hope, and could neither go on nor 
back. Bilbo accepted the challenge; and they asked one another many riddles. 
In the end Bilbo won the game, more by luck (as it seemed) than by wits; for 

upon the ring he lad picked up and forgotten: What haw I got in my pocket? 
This Gollum failed to answer, though he demanded three guesses. 


mere 'question' and not a 'riddle' according to the strict rules of the 
Game; but all agree that, after accepting it and trying to guess the answer, 
Gollum was bound by his promise. And Bilbo pressed him to keep his word; 


the thought came to him that this slimy creature might prove false, even 

things feared to break them. But after ages alone in the dark Gollum's heart 
was black, and treachery was in it. He slipped away, and returned to the 
island, of which Bilbo knew nothing, not far off in the dark water. There, 

'precious' was with him he would not fear any weapon at all. 

But the ring was not on the island; he had lost it, it was gone. His 

what had happened. But Gollum had at last leaped to a guess, too late. What 
has it got in its pocketses? he cried. The light in his eyes was like a 
green flame as he sped back to murder the hobbit and recover his 'precious'. 

from the water; and once more he was saved by his luck. For just as he ran 
he put his hand in his pocket, and the ring slipped quietly on to his 
finger. So it was that Gollum passed him without seeing him, and went to 

him, as he went along, cursing, and talking to himself about his 'precious'; 
from which talk at last even Bilbo guessed the truth, and hope came to him 
in the darkness: he himself had found the marvellous ring and a chance of 


At length they came to a halt before an unseen opening that led to the 

Gollum crouched at bay, smelling and listening; and Bilbo was tempted to 




slay him with his sword. But pity stayed him, and though he kept the ring, 
in which his only hope lay, he would not use it to help him kill the 

leaped over Gollum in the dark, and fled away down the passage, pursued by 
his enemy's cries of hate and despair: Thief thief! Baggins! We hates it 


Now it is a curious fact that this is not the story as Bilbo first told 
it to his companions. To them his account was that Gollum had promised to 

from his island he found the treasure was gone: a magic ring, which had been 
given to him long ago on his birthday. Bilbo guessed that this was the very 
ring that he had found, and as he had won the game, it was already his by 

show him the way out, as a reward instead of a present. This account Bilbo 
set down in his memoirs, and he seems never to have altered it himself, not 
even after the Council of Elrond. Evidently it still appeared in the 

many copies contain the true account (as an alternative), derived no doubt 
from notes by Frodo or Samwise, both of whom learned the truth, though they 
seem to have been unwilling to delete anything actually written by the old 



it, and he continued to be very curious about the ring. Eventually he got 
the true tale out of Bilbo after much questioning, which for a while 
strained their friendship; but the wizard seemed to think the truth 

and disturbing, to find that the good hobbit had not told the truth from the 
first: quite contrary to his habit. The idea of a 'present' was not mere 
hobbitlike invention, all the same. It was suggested to Bilbo, as he 

the ring his 'birthday present', many times. That also Gandalf thought 
strange and suspicious; but he did not discover the truth in this point for 


Of Bilbo's later adventures little more need be said here. With the 
help of the ring he escaped from the ore-guards at the gate and rejoined his 
companions. He used the ring many times on his quest, chiefly for the help 





his return to his home he never spoke of it again to anyone, save Gandalf 
and Frodo; and no one else in the Shire knew of its existence, or so he 
believed. Only to Frodo did he show the account of his Journey that he was 



marvellous mail, the gift of the Dwarves from the Dragon -hoard, he lent to a 
museum, to the Michel Delving Mathom-house in fact. But he kept in a drawer 
at Bag End the old cloak and hood that he had worn on his travels; and the 


He returned to his home at Bag End on June the 22nd in his fifty-second 
year (S.R. 1342), and nothing very notable occurred in the Shire until Mr. 

hundred-and-eleventh birthday (S.R. 1401). At this point this History 










events that led to the inclusion of the Shire in the Reunited Kingdom 
awakened among them a more widespread interest in their own history; and 

and Written down. The greater families were also concerned with events in 
the Kingdom at large, and many of their members studied its ancient 
histories and legends. By the end of the first century of the Fourth Age 

many historical books and records. 

The largest of these collections were probably at Undertowers, at Great 

drawn mainly from the Red Book of Westmarch. That most important source 


the history of the War of the Ring was so called because it was long 

Westmarch. 1 It was in origin Bilbo's private diary, which he took with him 
to Rivendell. Frodo brought it back to the Shire, together with many loose 
leaves of notes, and during S.R. 1420-1 he nearly filled its pages with his 
account of the War. But annexed to it and preserved with it, probably m a 

Bilbo gave to him as a parting gift. To these four volumes there was added 
in Westmarch a fifth containing commentaries, genealogies, and various other 


The original Red Book has not been preserved, but many copies were 
made, especially of the first volume, for the use of the descendants of the 
children of Master Samwise. The most important copy, however, has a 

Condor, probably at the request of the great-grandson of Peregrin, and 
completed in S.R. 1592 (F.A. 172). Its southern scribe appended this note: 

in all details of the Thain's Book m Minas Tirith. That book was a copy, 
made at the request of King Elessar, of the Red Book of the Periannath, and 




was brought to him by the Thain Peregrin when he retired to Gondor in IV 64. 


contained much that was later omitted or lost. In Minas Tirith it received 
much annotation, and many corrections, especially of names, words, and 
quotations in the Elvish languages; and there was added to it an abbreviated 
version of those parts of The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen which lie outside 

Barahir, grandson of the Steward Faramir, some time after the passing of the 
King. But the chief importance of Findegil’s copy is that it alone contains 
the whole of Bilbo's ’Translations from the Elvish'. These three volumes 

and 1418, he had used all the sources available to him in Rivendell, both 
living and written. But since they were little used by Frodo, being almost 
entirely concerned with the Elder Days, no more is said of them here. 


and at the same time kept up their connexions with Rohan and Gondor, the 
libraries at Bucklebury and Tuckborough contained much that did not appear 
in the Red Book. In Brandy Hall there were many works dealing with Eriador 



himself, though in the Shire he was chiefly remembered for his Herhlore of 
the Shire, and for his Reckoning of Years m which he discussed the relation 
of the calendars of the Shire and Bree to those of Rivendell, Gondor, and 

having special interest in discovering the kinship with the language of the 
Rohirrim of such 'shire-words' as mathom and old elements in place names. 

At Great Smials the books were of less interest to Shire-folk, though 

he and his successors collected many manuscripts written by scribes of 
Gondor: mainly copies or summaries of histories or legends relating to 
Elendil and his heirs. Only here in the Shire were to be found extensive 

probably at Great Smials that The Tale of Years 1 was put together, with the 
assistance of material collected by Meriadoc. Though the dates given are 
often conjectural, especially for the Second Age, they deserve attention. It 

Rivendell, which he visited more than once. There, though Elrond had 




departed, his sons long remained, together with some of the High-elven folk. 

Galadriel; but there is no record of the day when at last he sought the Grey 
Havens, and with him went the last living memory of the Elder Days in 









Chapter 1 . A Long-expected Party 


celebrating his eleventy -first birthday with a party of special 
magnificence, there was much talk and excitement in Hobbiton. 


Shire for sixty years, ever since his remarkable disappearance and 
unexpected return. The riches he had brought back from his travels had now 
become a local legend, and it was popularly believed, whatever the old folk 

treasure. And if that was not enough for fame, there was also his prolonged 
vigour to marvel at. Time wore on, but it seemed to have little effect on 
Mr. Baggins. At ninety he was much the same as at fifty. At ninety-nine they 

mark. There were some that shook their heads and thought this was too much 
of a good thing; it seemed unfair that anyone should possess (apparently) 


'It will have to be paid for,' they said. 'It isn't natural, and 


But so far trouble had not come; and as Mr. Baggins was generous with 
his money, most people were willing to forgive him his oddities and his good 
fortune. He remained on visiting terms with his relatives (except, of 



hobbits of poor and unimportant families. But he had no close friends, until 
some of his younger cousins began to grow up. 


When Bilbo was ninety-nine, he adopted Frodo as his heir, and brought him to 
live at Bag End; and the hopes of the Sackville-Bagginses were finally 
dashed. Bilbo and Frodo happened to have the same birthday, September 



then we can celebrate our birthday-parties comfortably together.' At that 




time Frodo was still in his tweens, as the hobbits called the irresponsible 
twenties between childhood and coming of age at thirty-three. 


combined birthday-parties at Bag End; but now it was understood that 
something quite exceptional was being planned for that autumn. Bilbo was 

respectable age for a hobbit (the Old Took himself had only reached 130); 
and Frodo was going to be thirty-three, 33) an important number: the date of 


Tongues began to wag in Flobbiton and By water; and rumour of the coming 
event travelled all over the Shire. The history and character of Mr. Bilbo 

folk suddenly found their reminiscences in welcome demand. 

No one had a more attentive audience than old Ham Gamgee, commonly 

Bywater road; and he spoke with some authority, for he had tended the garden 
at Bag End for forty years, and had helped old Holman in the same job before 
that. Now that he was himself growing old and stiff in the joints, the job 
was mainly carried on by his youngest son, Sam Gamgee. Both father and son 

itself, in Number 3 Bagshot Row just below Bag End. 

’A very nice well-spoken gentlehobbit is Mr. Bilbo, as I've always 

him, calling him 'Master Hamfast', and consulting him constantly upon the 
growing of vegetables - in the matter of 'roots', especially potatoes, the 
Gaffer was recognized as the leading authority by all in the neighbourhood 


'But what about this Frodo that lives with him?' asked Old Noakes of 

say. It beats me why any Baggins of Hobbiton should go looking for a wife 
away there in Buckland, where folks are so queer.' 


next-door neighbour), 'if they live on the wrong side of the Brandywine 
River, and right agin the Old Forest. That's a dark bad place, if half the 


'You're right, Dad!' said the Gaffer. 'Not that the Brandybucks of 





fool about with boats on that big river - and that isn’t natural. Small 
wonder that trouble came of it, I say. But be that as it may, Mr. Frodo is 
as nice a young hobbit as you could wish to meet. Very much like Mr. Bilbo, 

respectable hobbit was Mr. Drogo Baggins; there was never much to tell of 


'Drownded?' said several voices. They had heard this and other darker 
rumours before, of course; but hobbits have a passion for family history, 
and they were ready to hear it again. 'Well, so they say,' said the Gaffer. 




Mr. Bilbo's first cousin on the mother's side (her mother being the youngest 
of the Old Took's daughters); and Mr. Drogo was his second cousin. So Mr. 
Frodo is his first and second cousin, once removed either way, as the saying 
is, if you follow me. And Mr. Drogo was staying at Brandy Flail with his 

being partial to his vittles, and old Gorbadoc keeping a mighty generous 
table); and he went out boating on the Brandywine River; and he and his wife 


'I've heard they went on the water after dinner in the moonlight,' said 
Old Noakes; 'and it was Drogo's weight as sunk the boat.' 


Sandy man, the Hobbiton miller. 


did not much like the miller. 'There isn't no call to go talking of pushing 
and pulling. Boats are quite tricky enough for those that sit still without 
looking further for the cause of trouble. Anyway: there was this Mr. Frodo 

Bucklanders, being brought up anyhow in Brandy Hall. A regular warren, by 
all accounts. Old Master Gorbadoc never had fewer than a couple of hundred 
relations in the place. Mr. Bilbo never did a kinder deed than when he 


'But I reckon it was a nasty shock for those Sackville-Bagginses. They 
thought they were going to get Bag End, that time when he went off and was 

on living and living, and never looking a day older, bless him! And suddenly 
he produces an heir, and has all the papers made out proper. The 




Sackville-Bagginses won’t never see the inside of Bag End now, or it is to 


'There's a tidy bit of money tucked away up there, I hear tell,' said a 


'All the top of your hill is full of tunnels packed with chests of gold and 
silver, and jools, by what I've heard. ' 


know nothing about jools. Mr. Bilbo is free with his money, and there seems 
no lack of it; but I know of no tunnel -making. I saw Mr. Bilbo when he came 
back, a matter of sixty years ago, when I was a lad. I'd not long come 

End helping him to keep folks from trampling and trapessing all over the 
garden while the sale was on. And in the middle of it all Mr. Bilbo comes up 
the Hill with a pony and some mighty big bags and a couple of chests. I 

parts, where there be mountains of gold, they say; but there wasn't enough 
to fill tunnels. But my lad Sam will know more about that. He's in and out 
of Bag End. Crazy about stories of the old days he is, and he listens to all 

mark you, and I hope no harm will come of it. 

'Elves and Dragons' Isays to him. 'Cabbages and potatoes are better 

or you'll land in trouble too big for you, ' I says to him. And I might say 
it to others,' he added with a look at the stranger and the miller. 


wealth was now too firmly fixed in the minds of the younger generation of 


'Ah, but he has likely enough been adding to what he brought at first,' 
argued the miller, voicing common opinion. 'He's often away from home. And 
look at the outlandish folk that visit him: dwarves coming at night, and 

Gaffer, but Bag End's a queer place, and its folk are queerer.' 

'And you can say what you like, about what you know no more of than you 

more than usual. If that's being queer, then we could do with a bit more 
queerness in these parts. There's some not far away that wouldn't offer a 
pint of beer to a friend, if they lived in a hole with golden walls. But 





invited to the party, and there’s going to be presents, mark you, presents 
for all - this very month as is.' 


two later a rumour (probably started by the knowledgeable Sam) was spread 
about that there were going to be fireworks - fireworks, what is more, such 
as had not been seen in the Shire for nigh on a century, not indeed since 


Days passed and The Day drew nearer. An odd-looking waggon laden with 

to Bag End. The startled hobbits peered out of lamplit doors to gape at it. 

It was driven by outlandish folk, singing strange songs: dwarves with long 
beards and deep hoods. A few of them remained at Bag End. At the end of the 

of the Brandywine Bridge in broad daylight. An old man was driving it all 
alone. He wore a tall pointed blue hat, a long grey cloak, and a silver 
scarf. He had a long white beard and bushy eyebrows that stuck out beyond 

Hobbiton and right up the hill. It had a cargo of fireworks, as they rightly 
guessed. At Bilbo's front door the old man began to unload: there were great 
bundles of fireworks of all sorts and shapes, each labelled with a large red 


That was Gandalf s mark, of course, and the old man was Gandalf the 

smokes, and lights. His real business was far more difficult and dangerous, 
but the Shire-folk knew nothing about it. To them he was just one of the 
'attractions' at the Party. Hence the excitement of the hobbit-children. 'G 

though he only appeared in Hobbiton occasionally and never stopped long; but 
neither they nor any but the oldest of their elders had seen one of his 
firework displays - they now belonged to the legendary past. 


unloading. Bilbo gave a few pennies away; but not a single squib or cracker 
was forthcoming, to the disappointment of the onlookers. 


comes.' Then he disappeared inside with Bilbo, and the door was shut. The 
young hobbits stared at the door in vain for a while, and then made off, 






Inside Bag End, Bilbo and Gandalf were sitting at the open window of a 
small room looking out west on to the garden. The late afternoon was bright 

sun-flowers, and nasturtiums trailing all over the turf walls and peeping in 


'How bright your garden looks!' said Gandalf. 

'Yes,' said Bilbo. I am very fond indeed of it, and of all the dear old 






'Very well. It is no good saying any more. Stick to your plan - your 
whole plan, mind - and I hope it will turn out for the best, for you, and 



little joke.' 



'We shall see,' said Bilbo. 


might have been some grumbling about 'dealing locally', but that very week 
orders began to pour out of Bag End for every kind of provision, commodity, 
or luxury that could be obtained in Hobbiton or Bywater or anywhere in the 

days on the calendar; and they watched eagerly for the postman, hoping for 


Before long the invitations began pouring out, and the Hobbiton 
post-office was blocked, and the Bywater post-office was snowed under, and 

them going up the Hill, carrying hundreds of polite variations on Thank you, 



A notice appeared on the gate at Bag End: NO ADMITTANCE EXCEPT 


BUSINESS. Even those who had, or pretended to have Party Business were 
seldom allowed inside. Bilbo was busy: writing invitations, ticking off 

own. From the time of Gandalf s arrival he remained hidden from view. 

One morning the hobbits woke to find the large field, south of Bilbo's 




front door, covered with ropes and poles for tents and pavilions. A special 

large white gate were built there. The three hobbit-families of Bagshot Row, 
adjoining the field, were intensely interested and generally envied. Old 
Gaffer Gamgee stopped even pretending to work in his garden. 


that the tree that grew in the field was right inside it, and stood proudly 
near one end, at the head of the chief table. Lanterns were hung on all its 
branches. More promising still (to the hobbits’ mind): an enormous open-air 

from every inn and eating-house for miles around, arrived to supplement the 
dwarves and other odd folk that were quartered at Bag End. Excitement rose 


Then the weather clouded over. That was on Wednesday the eve of the 

dawned. The sun got up, the clouds vanished, flags were unfurled and the fun 


Bilbo Baggins called it a party, but it was really a variety of 
entertainments rolled into one. Practically everybody living near was 

the same, that did not matter. Many people from other parts of the Shire 
were also asked; and there were even a few from outside the borders. Bilbo 
met the guests (and additions) at the new white gate in person. Ele gave away 
presents to all and sundry - the latter were those who went out again by a 

people on their own birthdays. Not very expensive ones, as a rule, and not 
so lavishly as on this occasion; but it was not a bad system. Actually in 
Hobbiton and Bywater every day in the year it was somebody’s birthday, so 

at least once a week. But they never got tired of them. 

On this occasion the presents were unusually good. The hobbit-children 

toys the like of which they had never seen before, all beautiful and some 
obviously magical. Many of them had indeed been ordered a year before, and 
had come all the way from the Mountain and from Dale, and were of real 







there were songs, dances, music, games, and, of course, food and drink. 
There were three official meals: lunch, tea, and dinner (or supper). But 
lunch and tea were marked chiefly by the fact that at those times all the 

merely lots of people eating and drinking - continuously from elevenses 
until six-thirty, when the fireworks started. 


designed and made by him; and the special effects, set pieces, and flights 
of rockets were let off by him. But there was also a generous distribution 
of squibs, crackers, backarappers, sparklers, torches, dwarf-candles, 

art of Gandalf improved with age. 


sweet voices. There were green trees with trunks of dark smoke: their leaves 
opened like a whole spring unfolding in a moment, and their shining branches 
dropped glowing flowers down upon the astonished hobbits, disappearing with 

fountains of butterflies that flew glittering into the trees; there were 
pillars of coloured fires that rose and turned into eagles, or sailing 
ships, or a phalanx of flying swans; there was a red thunderstorm and a 

suddenly into the air with a yell like an embattled army, and came down 
again into the Water with a hiss like a hundred hot snakes. And there was 
also one last surprise, in honour of Bilbo, and it startled the hobbits 

up. It shaped itself like a mountain seen in the distance, and began to glow 
at the summit. It spouted green and scarlet flames. Out flew a red -golden 
dragon - not life-size, but terribly life-like: fire came from his jaws, his 

heads of the crowd. They all ducked, and many fell flat on their faces. The 
dragon passed like an express train, turned a somersault, and burst over 


That is the signal for supper!' said Bilbo. The pain and alarm 
vanished at once, and the prostrate hobbits leaped to their feet. There was 

to the special family dinner-party. This was held in the great pavilion with 
the tree. The invitations were limited to twelve dozen (a number also called 




by the hobbits one Gross, though the word was not considered proper to use 
of people); and the guests were selected from all the families to which 

friends (such as Gandalf). Many young hobbits were included, and present by 
parental permission; for hobbits were easy-going with their children in the 
matter of sitting up late, especially when there was a chance of getting 


There were many Bagginses and Boffins, and also many Tooks and 
Brandybucks; there were various Grubbs (relations of Bilbo Baggins' 

selection of Burrowses, Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Brockhouses, Goodbodies, 
Hornblowers and Proudfoots. Some of these were only very distantly 


with Bilbo, and some of them had hardly ever been in Hobbiton before, as 

forgotten. Otho and his wife Lobelia were present. They disliked Bilbo and 
detested Frodo, but so magnificent was the invitation card, written in 
golden ink, that they had felt it was impossible to refuse. Besides, their 

had a high reputation. 


though they rather dreaded the after-dinner speech of their host (an 
inevitable item). Fie was liable to drag in bits of what he called poetry; 
and sometimes, after a glass or two, would allude to the absurd adventures 

pleasant feast, in fact an engrossing entertainment: rich, abundant, varied, 
and prolonged. The purchase of provisions fell almost to nothing throughout 
the district in the ensuing weeks; but as Bilbo's catering had depleted the 

matter much. 


were, however, now in a tolerant mood, at that delightful stage which they 
called ’filling up the corners’. They were sipping their favourite drinks, 
and nibbling at their favourite dainties, and their fears were forgotten. 



My dear People, began Bilbo, rising in his place. ’Flear! Flear! Hear!’ 
they shouted, and kept on repeating it in chorus, seeming reluctant to 




follow their own advice. Bilbo left his place and went and stood on a chair 

face; the golden buttons shone on his embroidered silk waistcoat. They could 
all see him standing, waving one hand in the air, the other was in his 


My dear Bagginses and Boffins, he began again; and my dear Tooks and 
Brandybucks, and Grubbs, and Chubbs, and Burrowses, and Hornblowers, 






shouted an elderly hobbit from the back of the pavilion. His name, of 
course, was Proudfoot, and well merited; his feet were large, exceptionally 


Proudfoots, repeated Bilbo. Also my good Sackville-Bagginses that I 
welcome back at last to Bag End. Today is my one hundred and eleventh 

they shouted, and they hammered joyously on the tables. Bilbo was doing 
splendidly. This was the sort of stuff they liked: short and obvious. 

I hope you are all enjoying yourselves as much as I am. Deafening 

flutes, and other musical instruments. There were, as has been said, many 
young hobbits present. Hundreds of musical crackers had been pulled. Most of 

the 


instruments, small, but of perfect make and enchanting tones. Indeed, in one 
corner some of the young Tooks and Brandybucks, supposing Uncle Bilbo to 
have finished (since he had plainly said all that was necessary), now got up 

and Miss Melilot Brandybuck got on a table and with bells in their hands 
began to dance the Springle-ring: a pretty dance, but rather vigorous. 

But Bilbo had not finished. Seizing a horn from a youngster near by, he 

cried. Cheers from all the assembly. / have called you all together for a 
Purpose. Something in the way that he said this made an impression. There 







immensely fond of you all, and that eleventy-one years is too short a time 
to live among such excellent and admirable hobbits. Tremendous outburst of 


/ don 't know half of you half as well as I should like; and I like less 

difficult. There was some scattered clapping, but most of them were trying 
to work it out and see if it came to a compliment. 


birthday. For it is, of course, also the birthday of my heir and nephew, 

Frodo. He comes of age and into his inheritance today. Some perfunctory 
clapping by the elders; and some loud shouts of ’Frodo! Frodo! Jolly old 

was meant by 'coming into his inheritance'. Together we score one hundred 
and forty-four. Your numbers were chosen to fit this remarkable total: One 
Gross, if I may use the expression. No cheers. This was ridiculous. Many of 

sure they had only been asked to fill up the required number, like goods in 
a package. 'One Gross, indeed! Vulgar expression.' 


anniversary of my arrival by barrel at Esgaroth on the Long Lake; though the 
fact that it was my birthday slipped my memory on that occasion. I was only 
fifty-one then, and birthdays did not seem so important. The banquet was 

could only say 'thagyou very buch'. I now repeat it more correctly: Thank 
you very much for coming to my little party. Obstinate silence. They all 
feared that a song or some poetry was now imminent; and they were getting 

did not sing or recite. Fie paused for a moment. 

Thirdly and finally, he said, I wish to make an ANNOUNCEMENT. Fie 




I regret to announce that - though, as I said, eleventy-one years is far too 
short a time to spend among you - this is the END. I am going. I am leaving 


He stepped down and vanished. There was a blinding flash of light, and 
the guests all blinked. When they opened their eyes Bilbo was nowhere to be 






was a dead silence, until suddenly, after several deep breaths, every 
Baggins, Boffin, Took, Brandybuck, Grubb, Chubb, Burrows, Bolger, 



at once. 


food and drink were needed to cure the guests of shock and annoyance. 'He's 
mad. I always said so,' was probably the most popular comment. Even the 
Tooks (with a few exceptions) thought Bilbo’s behaviour was absurd. For the 

more than a ridiculous prank. 


dinner had clouded his wits, and he said to his daughter-in-law, Esmeralda: 
'There's something fishy in this, my dear! I believe that mad Baggins is off 
again. Silly old fool. But why worry? He hasn't taken the vittles with him.' 



Frodo was the only one present who had said nothing. For some time he 
had sat silent beside Bilbo's empty chair, and ignored all remarks and 

the know. He had difficulty in keeping from laughter at the indignant 
surprise of the guests. But at the same time he felt deeply troubled: he 
realized suddenly that he loved the old hobbit dearly. Most of the guests 

present; but the Sackville-Bagginses had already departed in wrath. Frodo 
did not want to have any more to do with the party. He gave orders for more 
wine to be served; then he got up and drained his own glass silently to the 


As for Bilbo Baggins, even while he was making his speech, he had been 
fingering the golden ring in his pocket: his magic ring that he had kept 

and he was never seen by any hobbit in Hobbiton again. 

He walked briskly back to his hole, and stood for a moment listening 

other parts of the field. Then he went in. He took off his party clothes, 
folded up and wrapped in tissue-paper his embroidered silk waistcoat, and 
put it away. Then he put on quickly some old untidy garments, and fastened 





battered black-leather scabbard. From a locked drawer, smelling of 
moth-balls, he took out an old cloak and hood. They had been locked up as if 
they were very precious, but they were so patched and weatherstained that 

green. They were rather too large for him. He then went into his study, and 
from a large strong-box took out a bundle wrapped in old cloths, and a 
leather -bound manuscript; and also a large bulky envelope. The book and 

already nearly full. Into the envelope he slipped his golden ring, and its 
fine chain, and then sealed it, and addressed it to Frodo. At first he put 
it on the mantelpiece, but suddenly he removed it and stuck it in his 


'Hullo!' said Bilbo. 'I wondered if you would turn up.' 

'I am glad to find you visible,' replied the wizard, sitting down in a 

that everything has gone off splendidly and according to plan?' 

'Yes, I do,' said Bilbo. "Though that flash was surprising: it quite 

suppose?' 


seemed to me necessary to give your guests something else that would seem to 


'And would spoil my joke. You are an interfering old busybody,' laughed 
Bilbo, 'but I expect you know best, as usual.' 


whole affair. It has now come to the final point. You have had your joke, 
and alarmed or offended most of your relations, and given the whole Shire 
something to talk about for nine days, or ninety-nine more likely. Are you 



told you before. Probably a permanent holiday: I don't expect I shall 
return. In fact, I don't mean to, and I have made all arrangements. 

'I am old, Gandalf. I don't look it, but I am beginning to feel it in 

thin, sort of stretched, if you know what I mean: like butter that has been 
scraped over too much bread. That can't be right. I need a change, or 






Gandalf looked curiously and closely at him. 'No, it does not seem 

the best.' 


Gandalf, mountains, and then find somewhere where I can rest. In peace and 
quiet, without a lot of relatives prying around, and a string of confounded 
visitors hanging on the bell. I might find somewhere where I can finish my 

after to the end of his days. ' 




'Oh, they may, in years to come. Frodo has read some already, as far as 
it has gone. You'll keep an eye on Frodo, won't you?' 



'He would come with me, of course, if I asked him. In fact he offered 
to once, just before the party. But he does not really want to, yet. I want 
to see the wild country again before I die, and the Mountains; but he is 

ought to be comfortable here. I am leaving everything to him, of course, 
except a few oddments. I hope he will be happy, when he gets used to being 


'Everything?' said Gandalf. 'The ring as well? You agreed to that, you 


'Well, er, yes, I suppose so,' stammered Bilbo. 



'In an envelope, if you must know,' said Bilbo impatiently. 'There on 

that odd now?' he said softly to himself. 'Yet after all, why not? Why 


Gandalf looked again very hard at Bilbo, and there was a gleam in his 
eyes. 'I think, Bilbo,' he said quietly, 'I should leave it behind. Don't 


'Well yes - and no. Now it comes to it, I don't like parting with it at 

he asked, and a curious change came over his voice. It was sharp with 




suspicion and annoyance. 'You are always badgering me about my ring; but 


have never bothered me about the other things that I got on my journey.' 


was important. Magic rings are - well, magical; and they are rare and 
curious. I was professionally interested in your ring, you may say; and I 
still am. I should like to know where it is, if you go wandering again. Also 

Bilbo, unless I am quite mistaken.' 


face grew hard. 'Why not?' he cried. 'And what business is it of yours, 
anyway, to know what I do with my own things? It is my own. I found it. It 


'Yes, yes,' said Gandalf. 'But there is no need to get angry.' 


own. My precious. Yes, my precious.' 

The wizard's face remained grave and attentive, and only a flicker in 

called that before,' he said, 'but not by you.' 

'But I say it now. And why not? Even if Gollum said the same once. It's 


Gandalf stood up. He spoke sternly. 'You will be a fool if you do. 

Bilbo,' he said. 'You make that clearer with every word you say. It has got 



'I'll do as I choose and go as I please,' said Bilbo obstinately. 

'Now, now, my dear hobbit! ' said Gandalf. 'All your long life we have 
been friends, and you owe me something. Come! Do as you promised: give it 



won't get it. I won't give my precious away, I tell you.' His hand strayed 


Gandalf s eyes flashed. It will be my turn to get angry soon,' he said. 

If you say that again, I shall. Then you will see Gandalf the Grey 
uncloaked.' He took a step towards the hobbit, and he seemed to grow tall 


Bilbo backed away to the wall, breathing hard, his hand clutching at 




his pocket. They stood for a while facing one another, and the air of the 

relaxed, and he began to tremble. 


never been like this before. What is it all about? It is mine isn't it? I 
found it, and Gollum would have killed me, if I hadn't kept it. I'm not a 


'I have never called you one,' Gandalf answered. 'And I am not one 
either. I am not trying to rob you, but to help you. I wish you would trust 

dwindle again to an old grey man, bent and troubled. 

Bilbo drew his hand over his eyes. I am sorry,' he said. 'But I felt so 

more. It has been so growing on my mind lately. Sometimes I have felt it was 
like an eye looking at me. And I am always wanting to put it on and 
disappear, don't you know; or wondering if it is safe, and pulling it out to 

my pocket. I don't know why. And I don't seem able to make up my mind.' 

'Then trust mine,' said Gandalf. 'It is quite made up. Go away and 
leave it behind. Stop possessing it. Give it to Frodo, and I will look after 



right,' he said with an effort. I will.' Then he shrugged his shoulders, and 
smiled rather ruefully. 'After all that's what this party business was all 
about, really: to give away lots of birthday presents, and somehow make it 

end, but it would be a pity to waste all my preparations. It would quite 


'Indeed it would take away the only point I ever saw in the affair,' 


'Very well,' said Bilbo, 'it goes to Frodo with all the rest.' He drew 
a deep breath. 'And now I really must be starting, or somebody else will 

again.' He picked up his bag and moved to the door. 

'You have still got the ring in your pocket,' said the wizard. 'Well, 

had better take it and deliver it for me. That will be safest.' 




'No, don’t give the ring to me,' said Gandalf. 'Put it on the 
mantelpiece. It will be safe enough there, till Frodo comes. I shall wait 



clock, his hand jerked back, and the packet fell on the floor. Before he 
could pick it up, the wizard stooped and seized it and set it in its place. 

A spasm of anger passed swiftly over the hobbit's face again. Suddenly it 

I'm off!' 


stand; then he whistled. Three dwarves came out of different rooms where 


'Is everything ready?' asked Bilbo. 'Everything packed and labelled?' 



'Well, let's start then!' He stepped out of the front-door. 

It was a fine night, and the black sky was dotted with stars. He looked 

with dwarves ! This is what I have really been longing for, for years ! 
Good-bye! ' he said, looking at his old home and bowing to the door. 


'Good-bye, for the present, Bilbo. Take care of yourself! You are old 


'Take care! I don't care. Don't you worry about me! I am as happy now 
as I have ever been, and that is saying a great deal. But the time has come. 


if to himself, he sang softly in the dark: 





Now far ahead the Road has gone, 





Until it joins some larger way 





He paused, silent for a moment. Then without another word he turned 
away from the lights and voices in the fields and tents, and followed by his 
three companions went round into his garden, and trotted down the long 





took to the meadows, passing into the night like a rustle of wind in the 


Gandalf remained for a while staring after him into the darkness. 
’Goodbye, my dear Bilbo - until our next meeting!' he said softly and went 


Frodo came in soon afterwards, and found him sitting in the dark, deep 


'Yes,' answered Gandalf, 'he has gone at last.' 


said Frodo. 'But I knew in my heart that he really meant to go. He always 
used to joke about serious things. I wish I had come back sooner, just to 


I think really he preferred slipping off quietly in the end,' said 

for you. There it is!' 




'You'll find his will and all the other documents in there, I think,' 
said the wizard. 'You are the master of Bag End now. And also, I fancy, 


'The ring!' exclaimed Frodo. 'Has he left me that? I wonder why. Still, 


'It may, and it may not,' said Gandalf. 'I should not make use of it, 
if I were you. But keep it secret, and keep it safe! Now I am going to bed.' 


the guests. Rumours of strange events had by now spread all over the field, 
but Frodo would only say no doubt everything will be cleared up in the 
morning. About midnight carriages came for the important folk. One by one 

came by arrangement, and removed in wheel-barrows those that had 


Night slowly passed. The sun rose. The hobbits rose rather later. 
Morning went on. People came and began (by orders) to clear away the 

bottles and plates, and the lanterns, and the flowering shrubs in boxes, and 
the crumbs and cracker -paper, the forgotten bags and gloves and 




handkerchiefs, and the uneaten food (a very small item). Then a number of 

Tooks, and other guests that lived or were staying near. By mid-day, when 
even the best-fed were out and about again, there was a large crowd at Bag 


Frodo was waiting on the step, smiling, but looking rather tired and 
worried. He welcomed all the callers, but he had not much more to say than 
before. His reply to all inquiries was simply this: 'Mr. Bilbo Baggins has 

come inside, as Bilbo had left 'messages' for them. 

Inside in the hall there was piled a large assortment of packages and 

tied. There were several labels of this sort: 


Adelard 



For DORA BAGGINS in memory of a LONG correspondence, with love 



surviving female relative of Bilbo and Frodo; she was ninety-nine, and had 
written reams of good advice for more than half a century. 

For MILO BURROWS, hoping it will be useful, from B.B., on a gold pen 


For ANGELICA'S use, from Uncle Bilbo, on a round convex mirror. She 




For the collection of HUGO BRACEGIRDLE, from a contributor, on an 
(empty) book -case. Hugo was a great borrower of books, and worse than usual 


For LOBELIA SACKVILLE-BAGGINS, as a PRESENT, on a case of 



while he was away on his former journey. Fobelia knew that quite well. When 
she arrived later in the day, she took the point at once, but she also took 


This is only a small selection of the assembled presents. Bilbo's 
residence had got rather cluttered up with things in the course of his long 





custom of giving so many birthday-presents was largely responsible. Not, of 
course, that the birthday-presents were always new, there were one or two 
old mathoms of forgotten uses that had circulated all around the district; 

The old hole was now being cleared a little. 

Every one of the various parting gifts had labels, written out 

course, most of the things were given where they would be wanted and 
welcome. The poorer hobbits, and especially those of Bagshot Row, did very 

waistcoat, and a bottle of ointment for creaking joints. Old Rory 
Brandybuck, in return for much hospitality, got a dozen bottles of Old 
Winyards: a strong red wine from the Southfarthing, and now quite mature, as 

him a capital fellow after the first bottle. 

There was plenty of everything left for Frodo. And, of course, all the 

furniture, were left in his possession. There was, however, no sign nor 
mention of money or jewellery: not a penny -piece or a glass bead was given 


Frodo had a very trying time that afternoon. A false rumour that the 

long the place was packed with people who had no business there, but could 
not be kept out. Fabels got torn off and mixed, and quarrels broke out. Some 
people tried to do swaps and deals in the hall; and others tried to make off 

unwanted or unwatched. The road to the gate was blocked with barrows and 


In the middle of the commotion the Sackville-Bagginses arrived. Frodo 
had retired for a while and left his friend Merry Brandybuck to keep an eye 


'He is indisposed,' he said. 'He is resting.' 

'Hiding, you mean,' said Fobelia. 'Anyway we want to see him and we 


Merry left them a long while in the hall, and they had time to discover 
their parting gift of spoons. It did not improve their tempers. Eventually 





papers in front of him. He looked indisposed - to see Sackville-Bagginses at 
any rate; and he stood up, fidgeting with something in his pocket. But he 


The Sackville-Bagginses were rather offensive. They began by offering 
him bad bargain-prices (as between friends) for various valuable and 

directed by Bilbo were being given away, they said the whole affair was very 


'Only one thing is clear to me,' said Otho, 'and that is that you are 
doing exceedingly well out of it. I insist on seeing the will.' 


read the will carefully and snorted. It was, unfortunately, very clear and 
correct (according to the legal customs of hobbits, which demand among other 


'Foiled again!' he said to his wife. 'And after waiting sixty years. 

Spoons? Fiddlesticks!' He snapped his fingers under Frodo's nose and slumped 
off. But Lobelia was not so easily got rid of. A little later Frodo came out 

place, investigating nooks and comers and tapping the floors. He escorted 
her firmly off the premises, after he had relieved her of several small (but 
rather valuable) articles that had somehow fallen inside her umbrella. Her 

parting remark; but all she found to say, turning round on the step, was: 

'You'll live to regret it, young fellow! Why didn't you go too? You 


'Did you hear that, Merry? That was an insult, if you like,' said Frodo 
as he shut the door on her. 




Then they went round the hole, and evicted three young hobbits (two 
Boffins and a Bolger) who were knocking holes in the walls of one of the 

Proudfoot's grandson), who had begun an excavation in the larger pantry, 
where he thought there was an echo. The legend of Bilbo's gold excited both 
curiosity and hope; for legendary gold (mysteriously obtained, if not 





-unless the search is interrupted. 

When he had overcome Sancho and pushed him out, Frodo collapsed on 

door, and don’t open it to anyone today, not even if they bring a battering 
ram.’ Then he went to revive himself with a belated cup of tea. 


'Lobelia again most likely,' he thought. 'She must have thought of something 
really nasty, and have come back again to say it. It can wait.' 

He went on with his tea. The knock was repeated, much louder, but he 


'If you don't let me in, Frodo, I shall blow your door right down your 


'My dear Gandalf! Half a minute!' cried Frodo, running out of the room 
to the door. 'Come in! Come in! I thought it was Lobelia.' 

'Then I forgive you. But I saw her some time ago, driving a pony-trap 


'She had already nearly curdled me. Honestly, I nearly tried on Bilbo's 


'Don't do that!' said Gandalf, sitting down. 'Do be careful of that 
ring, Frodo ! In fact, it is partly about that that I have come to say a last 






'Only what Bilbo told me. I have heard his story: how he found it, and 


'Which story, I wonder,' said Gandalf. 

'Oh, not what he told the dwarves and put in his book,' said Frodo. 'He 

pestered him till he told you, so I had better know too. "No secrets between 
us, Frodo," he said; "but they are not to go any further. It's mine 


'That's interesting,' said Gandalf. 'Well, what did you think of it 



true story much more likely, and I couldn't see the point of altering it at 
all. It was very unlike Bilbo to do so, anyway; and I thought it rather 





'So did I. But odd things may happen to people that have such treasures 
- if they use them. Let it be a warning to you to be very careful with it. 



'I don't understand,' said Frodo. 


about the ring, especially since last night. No need to worry. But if you 
take my advice you will use it very seldom, or not at all. At least I beg 
you not to use it in any way that will cause talk or rouse suspicion. I say 


'You are very mysterious! What are you afraid of?' 


something when I come back. I am going off at once: so this is good-bye for 


'At once!' cried Frodo. 'Why, I thought you were staying on for at 



good while; but I'll come and see you again, as soon as I can. Expect me 
when you see me! I shall slip in quietly. I shan't often be visiting the 

am a nuisance and a disturber of the peace. Some people are actually 
accusing me of spiriting Bilbo away, or worse. If you want to know, there is 
supposed to be a plot between you and me to get hold of his wealth.' 


abominable! I would give them Bag End and everything else, if I could get 
Bilbo back and go off tramping in the country with him. I love the Shire. 
But I begin to wish, somehow, that I had gone too. I wonder if I shall ever 



Take care of yourself! Lookout for me, especially at unlikely times ! 


Frodo saw him to the door. He gave a final wave of his hand, and walked 
off at a surprising pace; but Frodo thought the old wizard looked unusually 
bent, almost as if he was carrying a great weight. The evening was closing 

see him again for a long time. 








The talk did not die down in nine or even ninety -nine days. The second 
disappearance of Mr. Bilbo Baggins was discussed in Hobbiton, and indeed all 

that. It became a fireside -story for young hobbits; and eventually Mad 
Baggins, who used to vanish with a bang and a flash and reappear with bags 
of jewels and gold, became a favourite character of legend and lived on long 


But in the meantime, the general opinion in the neighbourhood was that 
Bilbo, who had always been rather cracked, had at last gone quite mad, and 

river and come to a tragic, but hardly an untimely, end. The blame was 


'If only that dratted wizard will leave young Frodo alone, perhaps 
he'll settle down and grow some hobbit-sense,' they said. And to all 

growth of hobbit-sense was not very noticeable. Indeed, he at once began to 
carry on Bilbo's reputation for oddity. He refused to go into mourning; and 
the next year he gave a party in honour of Bilbo's hundred-and-twelfth 

mark, for twenty guests were invited and there were several meals at which 
it snowed food and rained drink, as hobbits say. 


Bilbo's Birthday Party year after year until they got used to it. He said 
that he did not think Bilbo was dead. When they asked: 'Where is he then?' 


He lived alone, as Bilbo had done; but he had a good many friends, 
especially among the younger hobbits (mostly descendants of the Old Took) 

Folco Boffin and Fredegar Bolger were two of these; but his closest friends 
were Peregrin Took (usually called Pippin), and Merry Brandybuck (his real 
name was Meriadoc, but that was seldom remembered). Frodo went tramping 


over the Shire with them; but more often he wandered by himself, and to the 





the hills and woods under the starlight. Merry and Pippin suspected that he 
visited the Elves at times, as Bilbo had done. 


good ’preservation': outwardly he retained the appearance of a robust and 
energetic hobbit just out of his tweens. ’Some folk have all the luck,’ they 
said; but it was not until Frodo approached the usually more sober age of 


Frodo himself, after the first shock, found that being his own master 
and the Mr. Baggins of Bag End was rather pleasant. For some years he was 

himself the regret that he had not gone with Bilbo was steadily growing. He 
found himself wondering at times, especially in the autumn, about the wild 
lands, and strange visions of mountains that he had never seen came into his 

one day.' To which the other half of his mind always replied: 'Not yet.' 

So it went on, until his forties were running out, and his fiftieth 
birthday was drawing near: fifty was a number that he felt was somehow 

suddenly befallen Bilbo. Frodo began to feel restless, and the old paths 
seemed too well-trodden. He looked at maps, and wondered what lay beyond 
their edges: maps made in the Shire showed mostly white spaces beyond its 

Merry and his other friends watched him anxiously. Often he was seen walking 
and talking with the strange wayfarers that began at this time to appear in 


There were rumours of strange things happening in the world outside; 

years, Frodo gathered all the news he could. Elves, who seldom walked in the 
Shire, could now be seen passing westward through the woods in the evening, 
passing and not returning; but they were leaving Middle-earth and were no 
longer concerned with its troubles. There were, however, dwarves on the road 

end at the Grey Havens, and dwarves had always used it on their way to their 
mines in the Blue Mountains. They were the hobbits' chief source of news 
from distant parts - if they wanted any: as a rule dwarves said little and 

countries, seeking refuge in the West. They were troubled, and some spoke in 




whispers of the Enemy and of the Land of Mordor. 


shadow in the background of their memories; but it was ominous and 
disquieting. It seemed that the evil power in Mirkwood had been driven out 

strongholds of Mordor. The Dark Tower had been rebuilt, it was said. From 
there the power was spreading far and wide, and away far east and south 
there were wars and growing fear. Ores were multiplying again in the 

with dreadful weapons. And there were murmured hints of creatures more 
terrible than all these, but they had no name. 



But even the deafest and most stay-at-home began to hear queer tales; and 
those whose business took them to the borders saw strange things. The 
conversation in The Green Dragon at Bywater, one evening in the spring of 

Shire rumours had been heard, though most hobbits still laughed at them. 

Sam Gamgee was sitting in one corner near the fire, and opposite him 

hobbits listening to their talk. 



'Ah,' said Ted, 'you do, if you listen. But I can hear fireside-tales 
and children's stories at home, if I want to.' 


some of them than you reckon. Who invented the stories anyway? Take 



'No thank 'ee,' said Ted, 'I won't. I heard tell of them when I was a 
youngster, but there's no call to believe in them now. There's only one 


'All right,' said Sam, laughing with the rest. 'But what about these 
Tree-men, these giants, as you might call them? They do say that one bigger 
than a tree was seen up away beyond the North Moors not long back.' 




to the Northfarthing for the hunting. He saw one.' 

'Says he did, perhaps. Your Hal's always saying he's seen things; and 






'But this one was as big as an elm tree, and walking - walking seven 


'Then I bet it wasn't an inch. What he saw was an elm tree, as like as 


'But this one was walking, I tell you; and there ain't no elm tree on 


'Then Hal can't have seen one,' said Ted. There was some laughing and 


'All the same,' said Sam, 'you can't deny that others besides our 
Halfast have seen queer folk crossing the Shire - crossing it, mind you: 
there are more that are turned back at the borders. The Bounders have never 


'And I've heard tell that Elves are moving west. They do say they are 



vaguely: neither he nor any of them knew how far it was to the Sea, past the 
old towers beyond the western borders of the Shire. But it was an old 
tradition that away over there stood the Grey Havens, from which at times 


'They are sailing, sailing, sailing over the Sea, they are going into 

head sadly and solemnly. But Ted laughed. 

'Well, that isn't anything new, if you believe the old tales. And I 

haven't seen them doing it; nor any one else in the Shire.' 

'Well I don't know,' said Sam thoughtfully. He believed he had once 

legends that he had heard in his early years such fragments of tales and 
half-remembered stories about the Elves as the hobbits knew, had always 
moved him most deeply. 'There are some, even in these parts, as know the 

work for. He told me that they were sailing and he knows a bit about Elves. 
And old Mr. Bilbo knew more: many's the talk I had with him when I was a 


'Oh, they're both cracked,' said Ted. 'Leastways old Bilbo was cracked, 






drained his mug and went out noisily. 


one thing, there was a lot to do up in the Bag End garden, and he would have 
a busy day tomorrow, if the weather cleared. The grass was growing fast. But 
Sam had more on his mind than gardening. After a while he sighed, and got up 


It was early April and the sky was now clearing after heavy rain. The 

walked home under the early stars through Hobbiton and up the Hill, 


It was just at this time that Gandalf reappeared after his long 
absence. For three years after the Party he had been away. Then he paid 
Frodo a brief visit, and after taking a good look at him he went off again. 

unexpectedly after dusk, and going off without warning before sunrise. He 
would not discuss his own business and journeys, and seemed chiefly 


Then suddenly his visits had ceased. It was over nine years since Frodo 
had seen or heard of him, and he had begun to think that the wizard would 

Sam was walking home and twilight was fading, there came the once familiar 


Frodo welcomed his old friend with surprise and great delight. They 


’Ah well eh?' said Gandalf. 'You look the same as ever, Frodo!' 

'So do you,' Frodo replied; but secretly he thought that Gandalf looked 
older and more careworn. He pressed him for news of himself and of the wide 



Next morning after a late breakfast, the wizard was sitting with Frodo 
by the open window of the study. A bright fire was on the hearth, but the 
sun was warm, and the wind was in the South. Everything looked fresh, and 

trees' fingers. 


Bilbo had run out of Bag End without a handkerchief. His hair was perhaps 




whiter than it had been then, and his beard and eyebrows were perhaps 
longer, and his face more lined with care and wisdom; but his eyes were as 



He was smoking now in silence, for Frodo was sitting still, deep in 
thought. Even in the light of morning he felt the dark shadow of the tidings 
that Gandalf had brought. At last he broke the silence. 



Gandalf,' he said. 'And then you stopped, because you said that such matters 
were best left until daylight. Don't you think you had better finish now? 


way?' 


ever dared to think at first, so powerful that in the end it would utterly 
overcome anyone of mortal race who possessed it. It would possess him. 


call them, and they were, of course, of various kinds: some more potent and 
some less. The lesser rings were only essays in the craft before it was 
full-grown, and to the Elven-smiths they were but trifles - yet still to my 

were perilous. 


he does not grow or obtain more life, he merely continues, until at last 
every minute is a weariness. And if he often uses the Ring to make himself 
invisible, he fades: he becomes in the end invisible permanently, and walks 

sooner or later - later, if he is strong or well-meaning to begin with, but 
neither strength nor good purpose will last - sooner or later the dark power 


'How terrifying!' said Frodo. There was another long silence. The sound 


'How long have you known this?' asked Frodo at length. 'And how much 


'Bilbo knew no more than he told you, I am sure,' said Gandalf. 'He 
would certainly never have passed on to you anything that he thought would 

was very beautiful, and very useful at need; and if anything was wrong or 




queer, it was himself. He said that it was "growing on his mind", and he was 
always worrying about it; but he did not suspect that the ring itself was to 
blame. Though he had found out that the thing needed looking after; it did 

way, and might suddenly slip off a finger where it had been tight.' 

'Yes, he warned me of that in his last letter,' said Frodo, 'so I have 


'Very wise,' said Gandalf. 'But as for his long life, Bilbo never 

himself, and he was very proud of it. Though he was getting restless and 
uneasy. Thin and stretched he said. A sign that the ring was getting 


'How long have you known all this?' asked Frodo again. 


Frodo. But if you mean "known about this ring", well, I still do not know, 
one might say. There is a last test to make. But I no longer doubt my guess. 

'When did I first begin to guess?' he mused, searching back in memory. 


from Mirkwood, just before the Battle of Five Armies, that Bilbo found his 
ring. A shadow fell on my heart then, though I did not know yet what I 
feared. I wondered often how Gollum came by a Great Ring, as plainly it was 

of how he had "won" it, and I could not believe it. When I at last got the 
truth out of him, I saw at once that he had been trying to put his claim to 
the ring beyond doubt. Much like Gollum with his "birthday present". The 

power that set to work on its keeper at once. That was the first real 
warning I had that all was not well. I told Bilbo often that such rings were 
better left unused; but he resented it, and soon got angry. There was little 

harm; and I had no right to do so anyway. I could only watch and wait. I 
might perhaps have consulted Saruman the White, but something always held 



'Who is he?' asked Frodo. I have never heard of him before.' 


his. Yet he is great among the Wise. He is the chief of my order and the 




head of the Council. His knowledge is deep, but his pride has grown with it, 
and he takes ill any meddling. The lore of the Elven-rings, great and small, 

making; but when the Rings were debated in the Council, all that he would 
reveal to us of his ring-lore told against my fears. So my doubt slept - but 


'And all seemed well with Bilbo. And the years passed. Yes, they 
passed, and they seemed not to touch him. He showed no signs of age. The 
shadow fell on me again. But I said to myself: "After all he comes of a 


'And I waited. Until that night when he left this house. He said and 
did things then that filled me with a fear that no words of Saruman could 

spent most of the years since then in finding out the truth of it.' 

'There wasn't any permanent harm done, was there?' asked Frodo 
anxiously. 'He would get all right in time, wouldn't he? Be able to rest in 


'He felt better at once,' said Gandalf. 'But there is only one Power in 

know there is no Power in the world that knows all about hobbits. Among the 
Wise I am the only one that goes in for hobbit-lore: an obscure branch of 
knowledge, but full of surprises. Soft as butter they can be, and yet 

resist the Rings far longer than most of the Wise would believe. I don't 


'Of course, he possessed the ring for many years, and used it, so it 
might take a long while for the influence to wear off - before it was safe 
for him to see it again, for instance. Otherwise, he might live on for 

gave it up in the end of his own accord: an important point. No, I was not 
troubled about dear Bilbo any more, once he had let the thing go. It is for 


'Ever since Bilbo left I have been deeply concerned about you, and 
about all these charming, absurd, helpless hobbits. It would be a grievous 

jolly, stupid Bolgers, Hornblowers, Boffins, Bracegirdles, and the rest, not 
to mention the ridiculous Bagginses, became enslaved.' 





want such slaves?' 


hitherto, mark you - he has entirely overlooked the existence of hobbits. 

You should be thankful. But your safety has passed. He does not need you - 
he has many more useful servants - but he won't forget you again. And 

free. There is such a thing as malice and revenge.' 

'Revenge?' said Frodo. 'Revenge for what? I still don't understand what 


'It has everything to do with it,' said Gandalf. 'You do not know the 
real peril yet; but you shall. I was not sure of it myself when I was last 


Frodo took it from his breeches-pocket, where it was clasped to a chain 
that hung from his belt. He unfastened it and handed it slowly to the 
wizard. It felt suddenly very heavy, as if either it or Frodo himself was in 


Gandalf held it up. It looked to be made of pure and solid gold. 'Can 


'No,' said Frodo. 'There are none. It is quite plain, and it never 


'Well then, look!' To Frodo's astonishment and distress the wizard 
threw it suddenly into the middle of a glowing corner of the fire. Frodo 


'Wait!' he said in a commanding voice, giving Frodo a quick look from 


No apparent change came over the ring. After a while Gandalf got up, 
closed the shutters outside the window, and drew the curtains. The room 

windows, could still be heard faintly from the garden. For a moment the 
wizard stood looking at the fire; then he stooped and removed the ring to 
the hearth with the tongs, and at once picked it up. Frodo gasped. 


shrinking palm: it seemed to have become thicker and heavier than ever. 

'Hold it up!' said Gandalf. 'And look closely!' 


pen-strokes, running along the ring, outside and inside: lines of fire that 




seemed to form the letters of a flowing script. They shone piercingly 


I cannot read the fiery letters,' said Frodo in a quavering voice. 

'No,' said Gandalf, 'but I can. The letters are Elvish, of an ancient 

this in the Common Tongue is what is said, close enough: 

One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them, 



It is only two lines of a verse long known in Elven-lore: 



Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone, 



One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne 


One Ring to rule them all. One Ring to find them, 


In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie. ' 


Master -ring, the One Ring to rule them all. This is the One Ring that he 
lost many ages ago, to the great weakening of his power. He greatly desires 


Frodo sat silent and motionless. Fear seemed to stretch out a vast 
hand, like a dark cloud rising in the East and looming up to engulf him. 


'Ah!' said Gandalf. 'That is a very long story. The beginnings lie back 
in the Black Years, which only the lore-masters now remember. If I were to 

passed into Winter. 


rumours that you have heard are true: he has indeed arisen again and left 
his hold in Mirkwood and returned to his ancient fastness in the Dark Tower 
of Mordor. That name even you hobbits have heard of, like a shadow on the 

takes another shape and grows again.' 



'So do I,' said Gandalf, 'and so do all who live to see such times. But 




that is not for them to decide. All we have to decide is what to do with the 
time that is given, us. And already, Frodo, our time is beginning to look 


I think, but they are ripening. We shall be hard put to it. We should be 
very hard put to it, even if it were not for this dreadful chance. 

'The Enemy still lacks one thing to give him strength and knowledge to 

in a second darkness. He lacks the One Ring. 


never touched them or sullied them. Seven the Dwarf-kings possessed, but 
three he has recovered, and the others the dragons have consumed. Nine he 
gave to Mortal Men, proud and great, and so ensnared them. Long ago they 

under his great Shadow, his most terrible servants. Long ago. It is many a 
year since the Nine walked abroad. Yet who knows? As the Shadow grows 


more, they too may walk again. But come! We will not speak of such things 


'So it is now: the Nine he has gathered to himself; the Seven also, or 
else they are destroyed. The Three are hidden still. But that no longer 

his, and he let a great part of his own former power pass into it, so that 
he could rule all the others. If he recovers it, then he will command them 
all again, wherever they be, even the Three, and all that has been wrought 


'And this is the dreadful chance, Frodo. He believed that the One had 
perished; that the Elves had destroyed it, as should have been done. But he 
knows now that it has not perished, that it has been found. So he is seeking 



'Why, why wasn't it destroyed?' cried Frodo. 'And how did the Enemy 
ever come to lose it, if he was so strong, and it was so precious to him?' 

He clutched the Ring in his hand, as if he saw already dark fingers 


'It was taken from him,' said Gandalf. 'The strength of the Elves to 

The Men of Westernesse came to their aid. That is a chapter of ancient 




history which it might be good to recall; for there was sorrow then too, and 
gathering dark, but great valour, and great deeds that were not wholly vain. 


full by one who knows it best. 

'But for the moment, since most of all you need to know how this thing 

was Gil-galad, Elven-king and Elendil of Westernesse who overthrew Sauron, 
though they themselves perished in the deed; and Isildur Elendil's son cut 
the Ring from Sauron's hand and took it for his own. Then Sauron was 

shadow took shape again in Mirkwood. 


vanished. For Isildur was marching north along the east banks of the River, 
and near the Gladden Fields he was waylaid by the Ores of the Mountains, and 
almost all his folk were slain. He leaped into the waters, but the Ring 

with arrows.' 


he said, 'the Ring passed out of knowledge and legend; and even so much of 
its history is known now only to a few, and the Council of the Wise could 


'Fong after, but still very long ago, there lived by the banks of the 
Great River on the edge of Wilderland a clever -handed and quiet-footed 
little people. I guess they were of hobbit -kind; akin to the fathers of the 

made little boats of reeds. There was among them a family of high repute, 
for it was large and wealthier than most, and it was ruled by a grandmother 
of the folk, stern and wise in old lore, such as they had. The most 

interested in roots and beginnings; he dived into deep pools; he burrowed 
under trees and growing plants; he tunnelled into green mounds; and he 
ceased to look up at the hill-tops, or the leaves on trees, or the flowers 


'He had a friend called Djagol, of similar sort, sharper -eyed but not 
so quick and strong. On a time they took a boat and went down to the Gladden 

Smjagol got out and went nosing about the banks but Deal sat in the boat and 




fished. Suddenly a great fish took his hook, and before he knew where he 
was, he was dragged out and down into the water, to the bottom. Then he let 

and holding his breath he grabbed at it. 

'Then up he came spluttering, with weeds in his hair and a handful of 



in his hand lay a beautiful golden ring; and it shone and glittered in the 
sun, so that his heart was glad. But Smjagol had been watching him from 
behind a tree, and as Deal gloated over the ring, Smjagol came softly up 









'"I don't care," said Deal. "I have given you a present already, more 
than I could afford. I found this, and I'm going to keep it." 


the throat and strangled him, because the gold looked so bright and 
beautiful. Then he put the ring on his finger. 


from home, and his body was cunningly hidden. But Smjagol returned alone; 
and he found that none of his family could see him, when he was wearing the 
ring. He was very pleased with his discovery and he concealed it; and he 

malicious uses. He became sharp-eyed and keen-eared for all that was 
hurtful. The ring had given him power according to his stature. It is not to 

visible) 


thieving, and going about muttering to himself, and gurgling in his throat. 

So they called him Gollum, and cursed him, and told him to go far away; and 
his grandmother, desiring peace, expelled him from the family and turned him 


'He wandered in loneliness, weeping a little for the hardness of the 

down from the mountains, and he went that way. He caught fish in deep pools 




with invisible fingers and ate them raw. One day it was very hot, and as he 
was bending over a pool, he felt a burning on the back of his head) and a 

had almost forgotten about the Sun. Then for the last time he looked up and 


'But as he lowered his eyes, he saw far above the tops of the Misty 
Mountains, out of which the stream came. And he thought suddenly: "It would 
be cool and shady under those mountains. The Sun could not watch me there. 

secrets buried there which have not been discovered since the beginning." 

’So he journeyed by night up into the highlands, and he found a little 
cave out of which the dark stream ran; and he wormed his way like a maggot 

went into the shadows with him, and even the maker, when his power had 


to grow again, could learn nothing of it.' 


Gollum-creature that Bilbo met? How loathsome!' 


happened to others, even to some hobbits that I have known.' 

'I can't believe that Gollum was connected with hobbits, however 


'It is true all the same,' replied Gandalf. 'About their origins, at 
any rate, I know more than hobbits do themselves. And even Bilbo's story 
suggests the kinship. There was a great deal in the background of their 

remarkably well, very much better than a hobbit would understand, say, a 
Dwarf, or an Ore, or even an Elf. Think of the riddles they both knew, for 


'Yes,' said Frodo. 'Though other folks besides hobbits ask riddles, and 

the time. He was just trying to put poor Bilbo off his guard. And I daresay 
it amused his wickedness to start a game which might end in providing him 
with an easy victim, but if he lost would not hurt him.' 


it, I think, which you don't see yet. Even Gollum was not wholly ruined. He 
had proved tougher than even one of the Wise would have guessed -as a hobbit 




might. There was a little corner of his mind that was still his own, and 

past. It was actually pleasant, I think, to hear a kindly voice again, 
bringing up memories of wind, and trees, and sun on the grass, and such 


'But that, of course, would only make the evil part of him angrier in 

sighed. 'Alas! there is little hope of that for him. Yet not no hope. No, 
not though he possessed the Ring so long, almost as far back as he can 
remember. For it was long since he had worn it much: in the black darkness 

still. But the thing was eating up his mind, of course, and the torment had 


'All the "great secrets" under the mountains had turned out to be just 
empty night: there was nothing more to find out, nothing worth doing, only 
nasty furtive eating and resentful remembering. He was altogether wretched. 

Ring most of all.' 


the only thing he cared for? But if he hated it, why didn't he get rid of 


'You ought to begin to understand, Frodo, after all you have heard,' 
said Gandalf. 'He hated it and loved it, as he hated and loved himself. He 
could not get rid of it. He had no will left in the matter. 


treacherously, but its keeper never abandons it. At most he plays with the 
idea of handing it on to someone else's care - and that only at an early 

history has ever gone beyond playing, and really done it. He needed all my 
help, too. And even so he would never have just forsaken it, or cast it 
aside. It was not Gollum, Frodo, but the Ring itself that decided things. 



'What, just in time to meet Bilbo?' said Frodo. 'Wouldn't an Ore have 



strangest event in the whole history of the Ring so far: Bilbo's arrival 
just at that time, and putting his hand on it, blindly, in the dark. 




'There was more than one power at work, Frodo. The Ring was trying to 

then when a chance came it caught poor Deal, and he was murdered; and after 
that Gollum, and it had devoured him. It could make no further use of him: 
he was too small and mean; and as long as it stayed with him he would never 
leave his deep pool again. So now, when its master was awake once more and 



picked up by the most unlikely person imaginable: Bilbo from the Shire! 

'Behind that there was something else at work, beyond any design of the 
Ring-maker. I can put it no plainer than by saying that Bilbo was meant to 

have it. And that maybe an encouraging thought.' 




really know it all, or are you just guessing still?' 

Gandalf looked at Frodo, and his eyes glinted. I knew much and I have 

doings to you. The history of Elendil and Isildur and the One Ring is known 
to all the Wise. Your ring is shown to be that One Ring by the fire- writing 
alone, apart from any other evidence.' 'And when did you discover that?' 

wizard sharply. 'But I expected to find it. I have come back from dark 
journeys and long search to make that final test. It is the last proof, and 
all is now only too clear. Making out Gollum's part, and fitting it into the 

about Gollum, but I am not guessing now. I know. I have seen him.' 

'You have seen Gollum?' exclaimed Frodo in amazement. 


ago; but I have managed it at last.' 



'Not so clearly. What I have told you is what Gollum was willing to 
tell - though not, of course, in the way I have reported it. Gollum is a 
liar, and you have to sift his words. For instance, he called the Ring his 

grandmother, who had lots of beautiful things of that kind. A ridiculous 
story. I have no doubt that Smjagol's grandmother was a matriarch, a great 




person in her way, but to talk of her possessing many Elven-rings was 



'The murder of Deal haunted Gollum, and he had made up a defence, 
repeating it to his "precious" over and over again, as he gnawed bones in 
the dark, until he almost believed it. It was his birthday. Deal ought to 

present. It was his birthday present, and so on, and on. 

I endured him as long as I could, but the truth was desperately 

and wrung the true story out of him, bit by bit, together with much 
snivelling and snarling. He thought he was misunderstood and ill-used. But 

Riddle-game and Bilbo's escape, he would not say any more, except in dark 
hints. Some other fear was on him greater than mine. He muttered that he was 
going to gel his own back. People would see if he would stand being kicked, 
and driven into a hole and then robbed. Gollum had good friends now, good 

was his chief thought. He hated Bilbo and cursed his name. What is more, he 


'But how did he find that out?' asked Frodo. 

'Well, as for the name, Bilbo very foolishly told Gollum himself; and 

came out. Oh yes, he came out. His longing for the Ring proved stronger than 
his fear of the Ores, or even of the light. After a year or two he left the 
mountains. You see, though still bound by desire of it, the Ring was no 

old, yet less timid, and he was mortally hungry. 

'Light, light of Sun and Moon, he still feared and hated, and he always 

moonshine, and make his way swiftly and softly by dead of night with his 
pale cold eyes, and catch small frightened or unwary things. He grew 

Mirkwood, as one would expect.' 



'I saw him there,' answered Gandalf, 'but before that he had wandered 
far, following Bilbo's trail. It was difficult to learn anything from him 




for certain, for his talk was constantly interrupted by curses and threats. 



Little cheat. Not a fair question. It cheated first, it did. It broke the 
rules. We ought to have squeezed it, yes precious. And we will, precious!" 

’That is a sample of his talk. I don't suppose you want any more. I had 

that his padding feet had taken him at last to Esgaroth, and even to the 
streets of Dale, listening secretly and peering. Well, the news of the great 
events went far and wide in Wilderland, and many had heard Bilbo's name and 

home in the West. Gollum's sharp ears would soon learn what he wanted.' 

'Then why didn't he track Bilbo further?' asked Frodo. 'Why didn't he 


'Ah,' said Gandalf, 'now we come to it. I think Gollum tried to. He set 
out and came back westward, as far as the Great River. But then he turned 

drew him away. So my friends think, those that hunted him for me. 

'The Wood -elves tracked him first, an easy task for them, for his trail 

they never caught him. The wood was full of the rumour of him, dreadful 
tales even among beasts and birds. The Woodmen said that there was some 


terror abroad, a ghost that drank blood. It climbed trees to find nests; it 

cradles. 


off southwards and passed out of the Wood-elves' ken, and was lost. And then 
I made a great mistake. Yes, Frodo, and not the first; though I fear it may 
prove the worst. I let the matter be. I let him go; for I had much else to 


'Well, that was years ago. I have paid for it since with many dark and 
dangerous days. The trail was long cold when I took it up again, after Bilbo 
left here. And my search would have been in vain, but for the help that I 

of the world. Together we sought for Gollum down the whole length of 
Wilderland, without hope, and without success. But at last, when I had given 
up the chase and turned to other parts, Gollum was found. My friend returned 






’What he had been doing he would not say. He only wept and called us 
cruel, with many a gollum in his throat; and when we pressed him he whined 

pained him, as if he remembered some old torture. But I am afraid there is 
no possible doubt: he had made his slow, sneaking way, step by step, mile by 
mile, south, down at last to the Land of Mordor.' 



Even outside everything seemed still. No sound of Sam's shears could now be 


’Yes, to Mordor,' said Gandalf. 'Alas! Mordor draws all wicked things, 
and the Dark Power was bending all its will to gather them there. The Ring 

all folk were whispering then of the new Shadow in the South, and its hatred 
of the West. There were his fine new friends, who would help him in his 


'Wretched fool! In that land he would learn much, too much for his 

be caught, and taken - for examination. That was the way of it, I fear. When 
he was found he had already been there long, and was on his way back. On 
some errand of mischief. But that does not matter much now. His worst 


'Yes, alas! through him the Enemy has learned that the One has been 

ring. He knows that it is a Great Ring, for it gave long life. He knows that 
it is not one of the Three, for they have never been lost, and they endure 
no evil. He knows that it is not one of the Seven, or the Nine, for they are 

think, of hobbits and the Shire. 


out where it lies. Indeed, Frodo, I fear that he may even think that the 
long -unnoticed name of Baggins has become important.' 


imagined from your hints and warnings. O Gandalf, best of friends, what am I 
to do? For now I am really afraid. What am I to do? What a pity that Bilbo 
did not stab that vile creature, when he had a chance!' 






without need. And he has been well rewarded, Frodo. Be sure that he took so 
little hurt from the evil, and escaped in the end, because he began his 


'I am sorry,' said Frodo. 'But I am frightened; and I do not feel any 


'You have not seen him,' Gandalf broke in. 


mean to say that you, and the Elves, have let him live on after all those 
horrible deeds? Now at any rate he is as bad as an Ore, and just an enemy. 


'Deserves it! I daresay he does. Many that live deserve death. And some 
that die deserve life. Can you give it to them? Then do not be too eager to 

have not much hope that Gollum can be cured before he dies, but there is a 
chance of it. And he is bound up with the fate of the Ring. My heart tells 
me that he has some part to play yet, for good or ill, before the end; and 

least. In any case we did not kill him: he is very old and very wretched. 

The Wood-elves have him in prison, but they treat him with such kindness as 


'All the same,' said Frodo, 'even if Bilbo could not kill Gollum, I 
wish he had not kept the Ring. I wish he had never found it, and that I had 

away, or, or destroy it?' 


all that I have said? You are not thinking of what you are saying. But as 
for throwing it away, that was obviously wrong. These Rings have a way of 
being found. In evil hands it might have done great evil. Worst of all, it 

for this is the One, and he is exerting all his power to find it or draw it 


'Of course, my dear Frodo, it was dangerous for you; and that has 
troubled me deeply. But there was so much at stake that I had to take some 
risk - though even when I was far away there has never been a day when the 

did not think that the Ring would have any lasting effect on you, not for 
evil, not at any rate for a very long time. And you must remember that nine 




years ago, when I last saw you, I still knew little for certain.' 


cried Frodo again. If you had warned me, or even sent me a message, I would 


'Would you? How would you do that? Have you ever tried?' 



'Try!' said Gandalf. Try now!' 


appeared plain and smooth, without mark or device that he could see. The 
gold looked very fair and pure, and Frodo thought how rich and beautiful was 
its colour, how perfect was its roundness. It was an admirable thing and 

him into the very hottest part of the fire. But he found now that he could 
not do so, not without a great struggle. He weighed the Ring in his hand, 
hesitating, and forcing himself to remember all that Gandalf had told him; 
and then with an effort of will he made a movement, as if to cast it away - 


Gandalf laughed grimly. 'You see? Already you too, Frodo, cannot easily 
let it go, nor will to damage it. And I could not "make" you - except by 

useless. Even if you took it and struck it with a heavy sledge-hammer, it 
would make no dint in it. It cannot be unmade by your hands, or by mine. 

'Your small fire, of course, would not melt even ordinary gold. This 

is no smith's forge in this Shire that could change it at all. Not even the 
anvils and furnaces of the Dwarves could do that. It has been said that 
dragon-fire could melt and consume the Rings of Power, but there is not now 

ever any dragon, not even Ancalagon the Black, who could have harmed the 


Ring, the Ruling Ring, for that was made by Sauron himself. There is only 
one way: to find the Cracks of Doom in the depths of Orodruin, the 

to put it beyond the grasp of the Enemy for ever.' 

'I do really wish to destroy it!' cried Frodo. 'Or, well, to have it 

Ring ! Why did it come to me? Why was I chosen?' 




’Such questions cannot be answered,' said Gandalf. 'You may be sure 

wisdom, at any rate. But you have been chosen, and you must therefore use 
such strength and heart and wits as you have.' 


powerful. Will you not take the Ring?' 


have power too great and terrible. And over me the Ring would gain a power 
still greater and more deadly.' His eyes flashed and his face was lit as by 
a fire within. 'Do not tempt me! For I do not wish to become like the Dark 

weakness and the desire of strength to do good. Do not tempt me! I dare not 
take it, not even to keep it safe, unused. The wish to wield it would be too 
great, for my strength. I shall have such need of it. Great perils lie 



Sunlight streamed back again into the room. Sam passed along the path 
outside whistling. 'And now,' said the wizard, turning back to Frodo, 'the 
decision lies with you. But I will always help you.' He laid his hand on 

to bear. But we must do something, soon. The Enemy is moving.' 

There was a long silence. Gandalf sat down again and puffed at his 

was watching Frodo intently. Frodo gazed fixedly at the red embers on the 
hearth, until they filled all his vision, and he seemed to be looking down 
into profound wells of fire. He was thinking of the fabled Cracks of Doom 


'Well!' said Gandalf at last. 'What are you thinking about? Have you 


'No!' answered Frodo, coming back to himself out of darkness, and 
finding to his surprise that it was not dark, and that out of the window he 

you have said, I suppose I must keep the Ring and guard it, at least for the 


'Whatever it may do, it will be slow, slow to evil, if you keep it with 


'I hope so,' said Frodo. 'But I hope that you may find some other 




better keeper soon. But in the meanwhile it seems that I am a danger, a 
danger to all that live near me. I cannot keep the Ring and stay here. I 

sighed. 


times when I thought the inhabitants too stupid and dull for words, and have 
felt that an earthquake or an invasion of dragons might be good for them. 

behind, safe and comfortable, I shall find wandering more bearable: I shall 
know that somewhere there is a firm foothold, even if my feet cannot stand 


'Of course, I have sometimes thought of going away, but I imagined that 
as a kind of holiday, a series of adventures like Bilbo's or better, ending 

drawing it after me. And I suppose I must go alone, if I am to do that and 
save the Shire. But I feel very small, and very uprooted, and well - 


He did not tell Gandalf, but as he was speaking a great desire to 
follow Bilbo flamed up in his heart - to follow Bilbo, and even perhaps to 
find him again. It was so strong that it overcame his fear: he could almost 

on a similar morning long ago. 


creatures, as I have said before. You can learn all that there is to know 
about their ways in a month, and yet after a hundred years they can still 
surprise you at a pinch. I hardly expected to get such an answer, not even 

thought how important it would prove. I am afraid you are right. The Ring 
will not be able to stay hidden in the Shire much longer; and for your own 
sake, as well as for others, you will have to go, and leave the name of 

in the Wild. I will give you a travelling name now. When you go, go as Mr. 


'But I don't think you need go alone. Not if you know of anyone you can 
trust, and who would be willing to go by your side - and that you would be 

careful in choosing! And be careful of what you say, even to your closest 




friends! The enemy has many spies and many ways of hearing.' 

Suddenly he stopped as if listening. Frodo became aware that all was 

Then with a dart he sprang to the sill, and thrust a long arm out and 
downwards. There was a squawk, and up came Sam Gamgee's curly head 



'Well, well, bless my beard!' said Gandalf. 'Sam Gamgee is it? Now what 


'Lor bless you, Mr. Gandalf, sir!' said Sam. 'Nothing! Leastways I was 

picked up his shears and exhibited them as evidence. 

'I don't,' said Gandalf grimly. It is some time since I last heard the 


'Eavesdropping, sir? I don't follow you, begging your pardon. There 


'Don't be a fool! What have you heard, and why did you listen?' 
Gandalf s eyes flashed and his brows stuck out like bristles. 


let him turn me into anything unnatural! My old dad would take on so. I 
meant no harm, on my honour, sir!' 


although he was himself startled and rather puzzled. 'He knows, as well as I 
do, that you mean no harm. But just you up and answer his questions straight 


'Well, sir,' said Sam dithering a little. 'I heard a deal that I didn't 

dragons, and a fiery mountain, and - and Elves, sir. I listened because I 
couldn't help myself, if you know what I mean. Lor bless me, sir, but I do 
love tales of that sort. And I believe them too, whatever Ted may say. 

Elves, sir, when you go?' 


both his arms he lifted the astonished Sam, shears, grass-clippings and all, 
right through the window and stood him on the floor. 'Take you to see Elves, 
eh?' he said, eyeing Sam closely, but with a smile flickering on his face. 






'I did, sir. And that's why I choked: which you heard seemingly. I 


'It can't be helped, Sam,' said Frodo sadly. He had suddenly realized 
that flying from the Shire would mean more painful partings than merely 
saying farewell to the familiar comforts of Bag End. 'I shall have to go. 

will keep that dead secret. See? If you don't, if you even breathe a word of 
what you've heard here, then I hope Gandalf will turn you into a spotted 


Sam fell on his knees, trembling. 'Get up, Sam!' said Gandalf. I have 
thought of something better than that. Something to shut your mouth, and 
punish you properly for listening. You shall go away with Mr. Frodo!' 


go and see Elves and all! Hooray!' he shouted, and then burst into tears. 








'You ought to go quietly, and you ought to go soon,' said Gandalf. Two 
or three weeks had passed, and still Frodo made no sign of getting ready to 



'I know. But it is difficult to do both,' he objected. If I just vanish 


'Of course you mustn't vanish!' said Gandalf. 'That wouldn't do at all! 

I said soon, not instantly. If you can think of any way of slipping out of 

delay. But you must not delay too long.' 

'What about the autumn, on or after Our Birthday?' asked Frodo. 'I 


To tell the truth, he was very reluctant to start, now that it had come 
to the point. Bag End seemed a more desirable residence than it had for 

Shire. When autumn came, he knew that part at least of his heart would think 
more kindly of journeying, as it always did at that season. He had indeed 
privately made up his mind to leave on his fiftieth birthday: Bilbo's one 

out and follow him. Following Bilbo was uppermost in his mind, and the one 
thing that made the thought of leaving bearable. He thought as little as 
possible about the Ring, and where it might lead him in the end. But he did 

difficult to tell. 


do - but it must not be any later. I am getting very anxious. In the 
mean-while, do take care, and don't let out any hint of where you are going! 
And see that Sam Gamgee does not talk. If he does, I really shall turn him 


'As for where I am going,' said Frodo, 'it would be difficult to give 


'Don't be absurd!' said Gandalf. 'I am not warning you against leaving 
an address at the post-office! But you are leaving the Shire - and that 





set out, either North, South, West or East - and the direction should 


'I have been so taken up with the thoughts of leaving Bag End, and of 
saying farewell, that I have never even considered the direction,' said 

quest? Bilbo went to find a treasure, there and back again; but I go to lose 
one, and not return, as far as I can see.' 


your task to find the Cracks of Doom; but that quest may be for others: I do 
not know. At any rate you are not ready for that long road yet.' 

'No indeed!' said Frodo. 'But in the meantime what course am I to 



wizard. 'If you want my advice, make for Rivendell. That journey should not 
prove too perilous, though the Road is less easy than it was, and it will 


'Rivendell!' said Frodo. 'Very good: I will go east, and I will make 
for Rivendell. I will take Sam to visit the Elves; he will be delighted.' He 

house of Elrond Halfelven, and breathe the air of that deep valley where 
many of the Fair Folk still dwelt in peace. 


and Green Dragon. Giants and other portents on the borders of the Shire were 
forgotten for more important matters: Mr. Frodo was selling Bag End, indeed 


'For a nice bit, loo,' said some. 'At a bargain price,' said others, 

'and that's more likely when Mistress Fobelia's the buyer.' (Otho had died 
some years before, at the ripe but disappointed age of 102.) 


debatable than the price. A few held the theory - supported by the nods and 
hints of Mr. Baggins himself - that Frodo's money was running out: he was 

down in Buckland among his Brandybuck relations. 'As far from the 
Sackville-Bagginses as may be,' some added. But so firmly fixed had the 
notion of the immeasurable wealth of the Bagginses of Bag End become that 

that their fancy could suggest: to most it suggested a dark and yet 




unrevealed plot by Gandalf. Though he kept himself very quiet and did not go 
about by day, it was well known that he was 'hiding up in the Bag End'. But 

no doubt about the fact: Frodo Baggins was going back to Buckland. 

'Yes, I shall be moving this autumn,' he said. 'Merry Brandybuck is 


As a matter of fact with Merry's help he had already chosen and bought 
a little house at Crickhollow in the country beyond Bucklebury. To all but 
Sam he pretended he was going to settle down there permanently. The decision 
to set out eastwards had suggested the idea to him; for Buckland was on the 

going back would at least seem credible. 


the end of June, soon after Frodo's plan had been finally arranged, he 
suddenly announced that he was going off again next morning. 'Only for a 
short while, I hope,' he said. 'But I am going down beyond the southern 


He spoke lightly, but it seemed to Frodo that he looked rather worried. 



'Well no; but I have heard something that has made me anxious and needs 
looking into. If I think it necessary after all for you to get off at once, 

I shall come back immediately, or at least send word. In the meanwhile stick 
to your plan; but be more careful than ever, especially of the Ring. Fet me 


He went off at dawn. 'I may be back any day,' he said. 'At the very 

need my company on the Road.' 


Gandalf could have heard; but his uneasiness wore off, and in the fine 
weather he forgot his troubles for a while. The Shire had seldom seen so 
fair a summer, or so rich an autumn: the trees were laden with apples, honey 


Autumn was well under way before Frodo began to worry about Gandalf 
again. September was passing and there was still no news of him. The 

word. Bag End began to be busy. Some of Frodo's friends came to stay and 
help him with the packing: there was Fredegar Bolger and Folco Boffin, and 




of course his special friends Pippin Took and Merry Brandybuck. Between 




On September 20th two covered carts went off laden to Buckland, 
conveying the furniture and goods that Frodo had not sold to his new home, 

and kept a constant look-out for Gandalf. Thursday, his birthday morning, 
dawned as fair and clear as it had long ago for Bilbo's great party. Still 
Gandalf did not appear. In the evening Frodo gave his farewell feast: it was 

troubled and fell in no mood for it. The thought that he would so soon have 
to part with his young friends weighed on his heart. He wondered how he 


The four younger hobbits were, however, in high spirits, and the party 
soon became very cheerful in spite of Gandalf s absence. The dining-room was 

good wine: Frodo's wine had not been included in the sale to the 


’Whatever happens to the rest of my stuff, when the S.-B.s get their 
claws on it, at any rate I have found a good home for this!' said Frodo, as 


When they had sung many songs, and talked of many things they had done 
together, they toasted Bilbo's birthday, and they drank his health and 
Frodo's together according to Frodo's custom. Then they went out for a sniff 

was over, and Gandalf had not come. 


of the luggage. Merry took charge of this, and drove off with Fatty (that is 
Fredegar Bolger). 'Someone must get there and warm the house before you 
arrive,' said Merry. 'Well, see you later - the day after tomorrow, if you 


Folco went home after lunch, but Pippin remained behind. Frodo was 
restless and anxious, listening in vain for a sound of Gandalf. He decided 

would go to Crickhollow, and might even get there first. For Frodo was going 
on foot. His plan - for pleasure and a last look at the Shire as much as any 
other reason - was to walk from Hobbiton to Bucklebury Ferry, taking it 







himself in a dusty mirror in the half-empty hall. He had not done any 
strenuous walking for a long time, and the reflection looked rather flabby, 


After lunch, the Sackville-Bagginses, Lobelia and her sandy-haired son, 
Lotho, turned up, much to Frodo's annoyance. 'Ours at last!' said Lobelia, 

Bag End did not take effect until midnight. But Lobelia can perhaps be 
forgiven: she had been obliged to wait about seventy-seven years longer for 

Anyway, 


she wanted the keys. It took a long while to satisfy her, as she had brought 
a complete inventory with her and went right through it. In the end she 
departed with Lotho and the spare key and the promise that the other key 

plainly that she thought the Gamgees capable of plundering the hole during 


He took his own tea with Pippin and Sam Gamgee in the kitchen. It had 
been officially announced that Sam was coming to Buckland 'to do for Mr. 
Frodo and look after his bit of garden'; an arrangement that was approved by 
the Gaffer, though it did not console him for the prospect of having Lobelia 



left the washing up for Lobelia. Pippin and Sam strapped up their three 
packs and piled them in the porch. Pippin went out for a last stroll in the 


The sun went down. Bag End seemed sad and gloomy and dishevelled. 


wandered round the familiar rooms, and saw the light of the sunset fade on 

indoors. He went out and walked down to the gate at the bottom of the path, 
and then on a short way down the Hill Road. He half expected to see Gandalf 


The sky was clear and the stars were growing bright. 'It's going to be 
a fine night,' he said aloud. 'That's good for a beginning. I feel like 





Gandalf must follow me.' He turned to go back, and then slopped, for he 
heard voices, just round the corner by the end of Bagshot Row. One voice was 
certainly the old Gaffer's; the other was strange, and somehow unpleasant. 

He could not make out what it said, but he heard the Gaffer's answers, which 


'No, Mr. Baggins has gone away. Went this morning, and my Sam went 


him: anyway all his stuff went. Yes, sold out and gone, I tell'ee. Why? 

moved to Bucklebury or some such place, away down yonder. Yes it is - a tidy 
way. I've never been so far myself; they're queer folks in Buckland. No, I 


Footsteps went away down the Hill. Frodo wondered vaguely why the fact 
that they did not come on up the Hill seemed a great relief. 'I am sick of 

inquisitive lot they all are!' He had half a mind to go and ask the Gaffer 
who the inquirer was; but he thought better (or worse) of it, and turned and 


Pippin was sitting on his pack in the porch. Sam was not there. Frodo 
stepped inside the dark door. 'Sam!' he called. 'Sam! Time!' 


himself, wiping his mouth. He had been saying farewell to the beer -barrel in 


'All aboard, Sam?' said Frodo. 



Frodo shut and locked the round door, and gave the key to Sam. 'Run 
down with this to your home, Sam!' he said. 'Then cut along the Row and meet 

not going through the village tonight. Too many ears pricking and eyes 


'Well, now we're off at last!' said Frodo. They shouldered their packs 
and took up their sticks, and walked round the corner to the west side of 
Bag End. 'Good-bye!' said Frodo, looking at the dark blank windows. He 



after Peregrin down the garden-path. They jumped over the low place in the 




hedge at the bottom and took to the fields, passing into the darkness like a 


At the bottom of the Hill on its western side they came to the gate 
opening on to a narrow lane. There they halted and adjusted the straps of 

his heavy pack was hoisted high on his shoulders, and he had put on his head 
a tall shapeless fell bag, which he called a hat. In the gloom he looked 


'I am sure you have given me all the heaviest stuff,' said Frodo. 'I 
pity snails, and all that carry their homes on their backs.' 


stoutly and untruthfully. 


nothing except what he ordered us to pack. He's been slack lately, and he'll 
feel the weight less when he's walked off some of his own.' 


willow-wand, I'm sure, before I get to Buckland. But I was talking nonsense. 

I suspect you have taken more than your share, Sam, and I shall look into it 
at our next packing.' He picked up his stick again. 'Well, we all like 




turned left and took quietly to the fields again. They went in single file 
along hedgerows and the borders of coppices, and night fell dark about them. 
In their dark cloaks they were as invisible as if they all had magic rings. 


noise that even hobbits would hear. Even the wild things in the fields and 


After some time they crossed the Water, west of Hobbiton, by a narrow 
plank -bridge. The stream was there no more than a winding black ribbon, 
bordered with leaning alder -trees. A mile or two further south they hastily 

Tookland and bending south-eastwards they made for the Green Hill Country. 
As they began to climb its first slopes they looked back and saw the lamps 
in Hobbiton far off twinkling in the gentle valley of the Water. Soon it 

beside its grey pool. When the light of the last farm was far behind, 




peeping among the trees, Frodo turned and waved a hand in farewell. 

'I wonder if I shall ever look down into that valley again,' he said 



clear, cool, and starry, but smoke-like wisps of mist were creeping up the 
hill-sides from the streams and deep meadows. Thin-clad birches, swaying in 
a light wind above their heads, made a black net against the pale sky. They 

struck a narrow road, that went rolling up and down, fading grey into the 
darkness ahead: the road to Woodhall, and Stock, and the Bucklebury Ferry. 
It climbed away from the main road in the Water -valley, and wound over the 

Eastfarthing. 


trees that rustled their dry leaves in the night. It was very dark. At first 
they talked, or hummed a tune softly together, being now far away from 

behind. At last, as they began to climb a steep slope, he stopped and 


'I am so sleepy,' he said, 'that soon I shall fall down on the road. 

Are you going to sleep on your legs? It is nearly midnight.' 


great hurry. Merry expects us some time the day after tomorrow; but that 
leaves us nearly two days more. We'll halt at the first likely spot.' 

'The wind's in the West,' said Sam. 'If we get to the other side of 


There is a dry fir-wood just ahead, if I remember rightly.' Sam knew the 
land well within twenty miles of Hobbiton, but that was the limit of his 


Just over the top of the hill they came on the patch of fir-wood. 


trees, and gathered dead sticks and cones to make a fire. Soon they had a 
merry crackle of flame at the foot of a large fir-tree and they sat round it 
for a while, until they began to nod. Then, each in an angle of the great 

fast asleep. They set no watch; even Frodo feared no danger yet, for they 
were still in the heart of the Shire. A few creatures came and looked at 




them when the fire had died away. A fox passing through the wood on business 


'Hobbits!' he thought. 'Well, what next? I have heard of strange doings 
in this land, but I have seldom heard of a hobbit sleeping out of doors 

was quite right, but he never found out any more about it. 

The morning came, pale and clammy. Frodo woke up first, and found that 


'Walking for pleasure! Why didn't I drive?' he thought, as he usually 
did at the beginning of an expedition. 'And all my beautiful feather beds 
are sold to the Sackville-Bagginses! These tree-roots would do them good.' 



'What's beautiful about it?' said Pippin, peering over the edge of his 
blanket with one eye. 'Sam! Gel breakfast ready for half-past nine! Have you 


Sam jumped up, looking rather bleary. 'No, sir, I haven't, sir!' he 


Frodo stripped the blankets from Pippin and rolled him over, and then 

of the mists that lay thick on the world. Touched with gold and red the 
autumn trees seemed to be sailing rootless in a shadowy sea. A little below 
him to the left the road ran down steeply into a hollow and disappeared. 


shouted Pippin. 'Where's the water?' 


gone to find some,' said Pippin, busy setting out the food, and cups. 'You 


'You can come too,' said Frodo, 'and bring all the water-bottles.' 

There was a stream at the foot of the hill. They filled their bottles and 
the small camping kettle at a little fall where the water fell a few feet 

puffed as they bathed their faces and hands. 


was after ten o'clock, and the day was beginning to turn fine and hot. They 
went down the slope, and across the stream where it dived under the road, 
and up the next slope, and up and down another shoulder of the hills; and by 
that time their cloaks, blankets, water, food, and other gear already seemed 






The day's march promised to be warm and tiring work. After some miles, 

steep bank in a weary zig-zagging sort of way, and then prepared to go down 
for the last time. In front of them they saw the lower lands dotted with 
small clumps of trees that melted away in the distance to a brown woodland 



The road wound away before them like a piece of string. 

’The road goes on for ever,' said Pippin; 'but I can't without a rest. 


and looked away east into the haze, beyond which lay the River, and the end 
of the Shire in which he had spent all his life. Sam stood by him. His round 
eyes were wide open - for he was looking across lands he had never seen to a 




'Not that I ever heard,' said Pippin. Frodo was silent. He too was 
gazing eastward along the road, as if he had never seen it before. Suddenly 


The Road goes ever on and on 




And I must follow, if I can, 





Where many paths and errands meet. 



'That sounds like a bit of old Bilbo's rhyming,' said Pippin. 'Or is it 


'I don't know,' said Frodo. It came to me then, as if I was making it 
up; but I may have heard it long ago. Certainly it reminds me very much of 
Bilbo in the last years, before he went away. He used often to say there was 

doorstep, and every path was its tributary. "It's a dangerous business, 
Frodo, going out of your door," he used to say. "You step into the Road, and 
if you don't keep your feet, there is no knowing where you might be swept 





Mirkwood, and that if you let it, it might take you to the Lonely Mountain 
or even further and to worse places?" He used to say that on the path 
outside the front door at Bag End, especially after he had been out for a 



Pippin, unslinging his pack. The others followed his example, putting their 
packs against the bank and their legs out into the road. After a rest they 


The sun was beginning to get low and the light of afternoon was on the 
land as they went down the hill. So far they had not met a soul on the road. 
This way was not much used, being hardly fit for carts, and there was little 

more when Sam stopped a moment as if listening. They were now on level 
ground, and the road after much winding lay straight ahead through 
grass-land sprinkled with tall trees, outliers of the approaching woods. 



They looked back, but the turn of the road prevented them from seeing 
far. 'I wonder if that is Gandalf coming after us,' said Frodo; but even as 
he said it, he had a feeling that it was not so, and a sudden desire to hide 


'It may not matter much,' he said apologetically, 'but I would rather 

and discussed. And if it is Gandalf,' he added as an afterthought, 'we can 
give him a little surprise, to pay him out for being so late. Let's get out 


The other two ran quickly to the left and down into a little hollow not 
far from the road. There they lay flat. Frodo hesitated for a second: 

sound of hoofs drew nearer. Just in time he threw himself down in a patch of 
long grass behind a tree that overshadowed the road. Then he lifted his head 


Round the corner came a black horse, no hobbit-pony but a full-sized 
horse; and on it sat a large man, who seemed to crouch in the saddle, 
wrapped in a great black cloak and hood, so that only his boots in the high 


When it reached the tree and was level with Frodo the horse stopped. 

The riding figure sat quite still with its head bowed, as if listening. From 




inside the hood came a noise as of someone sniffing to catch an elusive 


A sudden unreasoning fear of discovery laid hold of Frodo, and he 
thought of his Ring. He hardly dared to breathe, and yet the desire to get 


He felt that he had only to slip it on, and then he would be safe. The 
advice of Gandalf seemed absurd. Bilbo had used the Ring. 'And I am still in 
the Shire,' he thought, as his hand touched the chain on which it hung. At 

forward, walking slowly at first, and then breaking into a quick trot. 

Frodo crawled to the edge of the road and watched the rider, until he 

that suddenly, before it passed out of sight, the horse turned aside and 
went into the trees on the right. 


himself, as he walked towards his companions. Pippin and Sam had remained 
flat in the grass, and had seen nothing; so Frodo described the rider and 


'I can't say why, but I felt certain he was looking or smelling for me; 
and also I felt certain that I did not want him to discover me. I've never 


'But what has one of the Big People got to do with us?' said Pippin. 



'There are some Men about,' said Frodo. 'Down in the Southfarthing they 
have had trouble with Big People, I believe. But I have never heard of 


'Begging your pardon,' put in Sam suddenly, 'I know where he comes 
from. It's from Hobbiton that this here black rider comes, unless there's 


'What do you mean?' said Frodo sharply, looking at him in astonishment. 


'I have only just remembered, sir. It was like this: when I got back to 
our hole yesterday evening with the key, my dad, he says to me: Hello, Sam! 
he says. I thought you were away with Mr. Frodo this morning. There's been a 

I've sent him on to Bucklebury. Not that Hiked the sound of him. He seemed 
mighty put out, when I told him Mr. Baggins had left his old home for good. 




Hissed at me, he did. It gave me quite a shudder. What sort of a fellow was 
he? says I to the Gaffer. / don 't know, says he; but he wasn 't a hobbit. He 

Big Folk from foreign parts. He spoke funny. 


didn't give much heed to it myself. The Gaffer is getting old, and more than 
a bit blind, and it must have been near dark when this fellow come up the 
Hill and found him taking the air at the end of our Row. I hope he hasn't 


'The Gaffer can't be blamed anyway,' said Frodo. 'As a matter of fact I 
heard him talking to a stranger, who seemed to be inquiring for me, and I 

it before. I might have been more careful on the road.' 

'Still, there may be no connexion between this rider and the Gaffer's 

how he could have followed us.' 


black chap.' 


would only have made matters worse.' 


had caught the muttered words. 


cousin Frodo! You can keep your secret for the present, if you want to be 
mysterious. In the meanwhile what are we to do? I should like a bite and a 
sup, but somehow I think we had better move on from here. Your talk of 


'Yes, I think we will move on now,' said Frodo; 'but not on the road 
-in case that rider comes back, or another follows him. We ought to do a 


The shadows of the trees were long and thin on the grass, as they 
started off again. They now kept a stone's throw to the left of the road, 

for the grass was thick and tussocky, and the ground uneven, and the trees 
began to draw together into thickets. 


was coming on before they came back to the road at the end of the long level 




over which it had run straight for some miles. At that point it bent left 
and went down into the lowlands of the Yale making for Stock; but a lane 

Woodhall. 'That is the way for us,' said Frodo. 

Not far from the road-meeting they came on the huge hulk of a tree: it 

round the broken stumps of its long-fallen limbs; but it was hollow, and 
could be entered by a great crack on the side away from the road. The 

wood. They rested and had a light meal, talking quietly and listening from 


Twilight was about them as they crept back to the lane. The West wind 
was sighing in the branches. Leaves were whispering. Soon the road began to 
fall gently but steadily into the dusk. A star came out above the trees in 

their spirits. After a time, as the stars grew thicker and brighter, the 
feeling of disquiet left them, and they no longer listened for the sound of 
hoofs. They began to hum softly, as hobbits have a way of doing as they walk 

hobbits it is a supper-song or a bed-song; but these hobbits hummed a 
walking-song (though not, of course, without any mention of supper and bed). 
Bilbo Baggins had made the words, to a tune that was as old as the hills, 

talked about Adventure. 





But not yet weary are our feet, 



That none have seen but we alone. 





Hill and water under sky, 






A new road or a secret gate, 







And take the hidden paths that run 










Home is behind, the world ahead, 


Through shadows to the edge of night, 





We'll wander back to home and bed. 





Fire and lamp, and meat and bread, 



The song ended. 'And now to bed! And now to bed!' sang Pippin in a high 




They slopped suddenly and stood as silent as tree-shadows, listening. 

There was a sound of hoofs in the lane, some way behind, but coming slow and 
clear down the wind. Quickly and quietly they slipped off the path, and ran 


'Don't let us go too far!' said Frodo. 'I don't want to be seen, but I 


'Very well!' said Pippin. 'But don't forget the sniffing!' 

The hoofs drew nearer. They had no time to find any hiding-place better 

large tree-bole, while Frodo crept back a few yards towards the lane. It 
showed grey and pale, a line of fading light through the wood. Above it the 
stars were thick in the dim sky, but there was no moon. 


across the lighter space between two trees, and then halt. It looked like 
the black shade of a horse led by a smaller black shadow. The black shadow 




stood close to the point where they had left the path, and it swayed from 

to the ground, and then began to crawl towards him. 

Once more the desire to slip on the Ring came over Frodo; but this time 

he was doing, his hand was groping in his pocket. But at that moment there 
came a sound like mingled song and laughter. Clear voices rose and fell in 
the starlit air. The black shadow straightened up and retreated. It climbed 

darkness on the other side. Frodo breathed again. 

'Elves!' exclaimed Sam in a hoarse whisper. 'Elves, sir!' He would have 

pulled him back. 


Woody End. They don't live in the Shire, but they wander into it in Spring 
and Autumn, out of their own lands away beyond the Tower Hills. I am 

here and was actually crawling towards us when the song began. As soon as he 
heard the voices he slipped away.' 


rider. 'Can't we go and see them?' 



The singing drew nearer. One clear voice rose now above the others. It was 
singing in the fair elven-tongue, of which Frodo knew only a little, and the 
others knew nothing. Yet the sound blending with the melody seemed to shape 

was the song as Frodo heard it: 




O Queen beyond the Western Seas! 









Gilthoniel! O Elbereth! 



In a far land beyond the Sea. 








In windy fields now bright and clear 





We still remember, we who dwell 



Thy starlight on the Western Seas. 


Elbereth!' said Frodo in amazement, 'Few of that fairest folk are ever seen 
in the Shire. Not many now remain in Middle-earth, east of the Great Sea. 


The hobbits sat in shadow by the wayside. Before long the Elves came 
down the lane towards the valley. They passed slowly, and the hobbits could 

lights, yet as they walked a shimmer, like the light of the moon above the 
rim of the hills before it rises, seemed to fall about their feet. They were 
now silent, and as the last Elf passed he turned and looked towards the 



lost?' Then he called aloud to the others, and all the company stopped and 


'This is indeed wonderful!' they said. 'Three hobbits in a wood at 
night! We have not seen such a thing since Bilbo went away. What is the 


'The meaning of it, fair people,' said Frodo, 'is simply that we seem 

would welcome your company.' 


laughed. 'And how do you know that we go the same way as you, for you do 


know whither we are going?' 



'We know many things,' they said. 'We have seen you often before with 


'Who are you, and who is your lord?' asked Frodo. 




'I am Gildor,' answered their leader, the Elf who had first hailed him. 


kindred have long ago departed and we too are now only tarrying here a 
while, ere we return over the Great Sea. But some of our kinsfolk dwell 
still in peace in Rivendell. Come now, Frodo, tell us what you are doing? 



'O Wise People!' interrupted Pippin eagerly. ’Tell us about the Black 


'Black Riders?' they said in low voices. 'Why do you ask about Black 



twice,' said Pippin; 'only a little while ago he slipped away as you drew 


The Elves did not answer at once, but spoke together softly in their 
own tongue. At length Gildor turned to the hobbits. 'We will not speak of 
this here,' he said. 'We think you had best come now with us. It is not our 

with us tonight, if you will.' 


was speechless. 'I thank you indeed, Gildor Inglorion,' said Frodo bowing. 
'Elen snla l®menn' omentielvo, a star shines on the hour of our meeting,' he 


'Be careful, friends!' cried Gildor laughing. 'Speak no secrets! Here 
is a scholar in the Ancient Tongue. Bilbo was a good master. Hail, 

our company! You had best walk in the middle so that you may not stray. You 


'Why? Where are you going?' asked Frodo. 

'For tonight we go to the woods on the hills above Woodhall. It is some 

journey tomorrow.' 


lights: for Elves (even more than hobbits) could walk when they wished 
without sound or footfall. Pippin soon began to feel sleepy, and staggered 
once or twice; but each time a tall Elf at his side put out his arm and 

with an expression on his face half of fear and half of astonished joy. 




The woods on either side became denser; the trees were now younger and 
thicker; and as the lane went lower, running down into a fold of the hills, 

last the Elves turned aside from the path. A green ride lay almost unseen 
through the thickets on the right; and this they followed as it wound away 
back up the wooded slopes on to the top of a shoulder of the hills that 

the shadow of the trees, and before them lay a wide space of grass, grey 
under the night. On three sides the woods pressed upon it; but eastward the 
ground fell steeply and the tops of the dark trees, growing at the bottom of 

under the stars. Nearer at hand a few lights twinkled in the village of 


The Elves sat on the grass and spoke together in soft voices; they 
seemed to take no further notice of the hobbits. Frodo and his companions 

The night grew on, and the lights in the valley went out. Pippin fell 
asleep, pillowed on a green hillock. 


above the mists red Borgil rose, glowing like a jewel of fire. Then by some 
shift of airs all the mist was drawn away like a veil, and there leaned up, 

Menelvagor with his shining belt. The Elves all burst into song. Suddenly 
under the trees a fire sprang up with a red light. 


speech and merriment!' 


hall, and food for hungry guests,' said an Elf standing before him. 

At the south end of the greensward there was an opening. There the 

roofed by the boughs of trees. Their great trunks ran like pillars down each 
side. In the middle there was a wood-fire blazing, and upon the tree-pillars 
torches with lights of gold and silver were burning steadily. The Elves sat 
round the fire upon the grass or upon the sawn rings of old trunks. Some 

heaped plates and dishes. 






the greenwood far from our halls. If ever you are our guests at home, we 


'It seems to me good enough for a birthday-party,' said Frodo. 

Pippin afterwards recalled little of either food or drink, for his mind 

various and so beautiful that he felt in a waking dream. But he remembered 
that there was bread, surpassing the savour of a fair white loaf to one who 
is starving; and fruits sweet as wildberries and richer than the tended 

cool as a clear fountain, golden as a summer afternoon. 

Sam could never describe in words, nor picture clearly to himself, what 
he felt or thought that night, though it remained in his memory as one of 

sir, if I could grow apples like that, I would call myself a gardener. But 
it was the singing that went to my heart, if you know what I mean.' 


chiefly on the words spoken. He knew a little of the elf-speech and listened 
eagerly. Now and again he spoke to those that served him and thanked them in 
their own language. They smiled at him and said laughing: 'Here is a jewel 


After a while Pippin fell fast asleep, and was lifted up and borne away 

rest of the night away. Sam refused to leave his master. When Pippin had 
gone, he came and sat curled up at Frodo's feet, where at last he nodded and 
closed his eyes. Frodo remained long awake, talking with Gildor. 


much about happenings in the wide world outside the Shire. The tidings were 
mostly sad and ominous: of gathering darkness, the wars of Men, and the 
flight of the Elves. At last Frodo asked the question that was nearest to 




Gildor smiled. 'Yes,' he answered. 'Twice. He said farewell to us on 
this very spot. But I saw him once again, far from here.' He would say no 


'You do not ask me or tell me much that concerns yourself, Frodo,' said 
Gildor. 'But I already know a little, and I can read more in your face and 
in the thought behind your questions. You are leaving the Shire, and yet you 





that you will ever return. Is not that so?' 


Gandalf and my faithful Sam.' He looked down at Sam, who was snoring 


'The secret will not reach the Enemy from us,' said Gildor. 

'The Enemy?' said Frodo. 'Then you know why I am leaving the Shire?' 


Gildor; 'but I perceive that he is - strange indeed though that seems to me. 

And I warn you that peril is now both before you and behind you, and upon 


'You mean the Riders? I feared that they were servants of the Enemy. 




'Nothing about such creatures.' 


you from your journey. For it seems to me that you have set out only just in 
time, if indeed you are in time. You must now make haste, and neither stay 
nor turn back; for the Shire is no longer any protection to you.' 


hints and warnings,' exclaimed Frodo. 'I knew that danger lay ahead, of 
course; but I did not expect to meet it in our own Shire. Can't a hobbit 


'But it is not your own Shire,' said Gildor. 'Others dwelt here before 
hobbits were; and others will dwell here again when hobbits are no more. The 
wide world is all about you: you can fence yourselves in, but you cannot for 



do now? My plan was to leave the Shire secretly, and make my way to 
Rivendell; but now my footsteps are dogged, before ever I get to Buckland.' 

'I think you should still follow that plan,' said Gildor. 'I do not 

clearer counsel, you should ask Gandalf. I do not know the reason for your 
flight, and therefore I do not know by what means your pursuers will assail 
you. These things Gandalf must know. I suppose that you will see him before 


'I hope so. But that is another thing that makes me anxious. I have 







latest two nights ago; but he has never appeared. Now I am wondering what 
can have happened. Should I wait for him?’ 


last. 'That Gandalf should be late, does not bode well. But it is said: Do 
not meddle in the affairs of Wizards, for they are subtle and quick to 


'And it is also said,' answered Frodo: 'Go not to the Elves for 


'Is it indeed?' laughed Gildor. 'Elves seldom give unguarded advice, 
for advice is a dangerous gift, even from the wise to the wise, and all 
courses may run ill. But what would you? You have not told me all concerning 

advice, I will for friendship's sake give it. I think you should now go at 
once, without delay; and if Gandalf does not come before you set out, then I 
also advise this: do not go alone. Take such friends as are trusty and 


The Elves have their own labours and their own sorrows, and they are little 
concerned with the ways of hobbits, or of any other creatures upon earth. 

Our paths cross theirs seldom, by chance or purpose. In this meeting there 

say too much.' 


plainly what the Black Riders are. If I take your advice I may not see 
Gandalf for a long while, and I ought to know what is the danger that 


'Is it not enough to know that they are servants of the Enemy?' 

more of me! But my heart forbodes that, ere all is ended, you, Frodo son of 
Drogo, will know more of these fell things than Gildor Inglorion. May 


'But where shall I find courage?' asked Frodo. 'That is what I chiefly 


'Courage is found in unlikely places,' said Gildor. 'Be of good hope! 






through the lands. The Wandering Companies shall know of your journey, 


those that have power for good shall be on the watch. I name you Elf-friend; 
and may the stars shine upon the end of your road! Seldom have we had such 

from the lips of other wanderers in the world.' 

Frodo felt sleep coming upon him, even as Gildor finished speaking. 'I 

he threw himself upon a bed and fell at once into a dreamless slumber. 




Chapter 4 . A Short Cut to Mushrooms 




living tree with branches laced and drooping to the ground; his bed was of 
fern and grass, deep and soft and strangely fragrant. The sun was shining 
through the fluttering leaves, which were still green upon the tree. He 


Sam was sitting on the grass near the edge of the wood. Pippin was 


'They have left us fruit and drink, and bread,' said Pippin. 'Come and 
have your breakfast. The bread tastes almost as good as it did last night. I 


Frodo sat down beside Sam and began to eat. 'What is the plan for 


'To walk to Bucklebury as quickly as possible,' answered Frodo, and 


'Do you think we shall see anything of those Riders?' asked Pippin 
cheerfully. Under the morning sun the prospect of seeing a whole troop of 


'Yes, probably,' said Frodo, not liking the reminder. 'But I hope to 


'Did you find out anything about them from Gildor?' 

'Not much - only hints and riddles,' said Frodo evasively. 'Did you ask 




'You should have. I am sure it is very important.' 

'In that case I am sure Gildor would have refused to explain it,' said 

a string of questions while I am eating. I want to think!' 

'Good heavens!' said Pippin. 'At breakfast?' He walked away towards the 


From Frodo' s mind the bright morning - treacherously bright, he thought 

The merry voice of Pippin came to him. He was running on the green turf and 





'No! I could not!' he said to himself. 'It is one thing to take my 
young friends walking over the Shire with me, until we are hungry and weary, 

weariness may have no cure, is quite another - even if they are willing to 
come. The inheritance is mine alone. I don't think I ought even to take 
Sam.' He looked at Sam Gamgee, and discovered that Sam was watching him. 


ever I can - in fact I have made up my mind now not even to wait a day at 
Crickhollow, if it can be helped.' 







'It is going to be very dangerous, Sam. 'It is already dangerous. Most 


'If you don't come back, sir, then I shan't, that's certain,' said Sam. 

'Don't you leave him! they said to me. Leave him! I said. I never mean to. I 
am going with him, if he climbs to the Moon, and if any of those Black 



'Who are they, and what are you talking about?' 

'The Elves, sir. We had some talk last night; and they seemed to know 

Elves, sir! Wonderful!' 


closer view?' 


Sam slowly. 'It don't seem to matter what I think about them. They are quite 
different from what I expected - so old and young, and so gay and sad, as it 


Frodo looked at Sam rather startled, half expecting to see some outward 

like the voice of the old Sam Gamgee that he thought he knew. But it looked 
like the old Sam Gamgee sitting there, except that his face was unusually 


'Do you feel any need to leave the Shire now - now that your wish to 


'Yes, sir. I don't know how to say it, but after last night I feel 




different. I seem to see ahead, in a kind of way. I know we are going to 

to see Elves now, nor dragons, nor mountains, that I want - 1 don't rightly 
know what I want: but I have something to do before the end, and it lies 
ahead, not in the Shire. I must see it through, sir, if you understand me.' 


companion. I am content. We will go together.' 

Frodo finished his breakfast in silence. Then standing up he looked 


'All ready to start?' he said as Pippin ran up. 'We must be getting off 


'You slept late, you mean,' said Pippin. 'I was up long before; and we 
are only waiting for you to finish eating and thinking.' 


as quickly as possible. I am not going out of the way, back to the road we 
left last night: I am going to cut straight across country from here.' 

'Then you are going to fly,' said Pippin. 'You won't cut straight on 


'We can cut straighter than the road anyway,' answered Frodo. 'The 

can see a bend of it away north over there. It goes round the north end of 
the Marish so as to strike the causeway from the Bridge above Stock. But 
that is miles out of the way. We could save a quarter of the distance if we 


'Short cuts make long delays, ' argued Pippin. 'The country is rough 
round here, and there are bogs and all kinds of difficulties down in the 

Riders, I can't see that it is any worse meeting them on a road than in a 


'It is less easy to find people in the woods and fields,' answered 
Frodo. 'And if you are supposed to be on the road, there is some chance that 


'All right!' said Pippin. 'I will follow you into every bog and ditch. 

But it is hard! I had counted on passing the Golden Perch at Stock before 
sundown. The best beer in the Eastfarthing, or used to be: it is a long time 


'That settles it!' said Frodo. 'Short cuts make delays, but inns make 





want to get to Bucklebury before dark. What do you say, Sam?' 

'I will go along with you, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam (in spite of private 


Then if we are going to toil through bog and briar, let's go now!' 


It was already nearly as hot as it had been the day before; but clouds 
were beginning to come up from the West. It looked likely to turn to rain. 


trees below. Their course had been chosen to leave Woodhall to their left, 
and to cut slanting through the woods that clustered along the eastern side 
of the hills, until they reached the flats beyond. Then they could make 
straight for the Ferry over country that was open, except for a few ditches 


He soon found that the thicket was closer and more tangled than it had 
appeared. There were no paths in the undergrowth, and they did not get on 
very fast. When they had struggled to the bottom of the bank, they found a 

slippery sides overhung with brambles. Most inconveniently it cut across the 
line they had chosen. They could not jump over it, nor indeed get across it 
at all without getting wet, scratched, and muddy. They halted, wondering 


Sam Gamgee looked back. Through an opening in the trees he caught a 
glimpse of the top of the green bank from which they had climbed down. 


the edge high above them they saw against the sky a horse standing. Beside 


They at once gave up any idea of going back. Frodo led the way, and 
plunged quickly into the thick bushes beside the stream. 'Whew!' he said to 
Pippin. 'We were both right! The short cut has gone crooked already; but we 

anything coming?' 


there was no sound of pursuit. 'I don't fancy he would try bringing his 
horse down that bank,' said Sam. 'But I guess he knows we came down it. We 


Going on was not altogether easy. They had packs to carry, and the 





from the wind by the ridge behind, and the air was still and stuffy. When 
they forced their way at last into more open ground, they were hot and tired 
and very scratched, and they were also no longer certain of the direction in 

levels and became broader and shallower, wandering off towards the Marish 


’Why, this is the Stock-brook!' said Pippin. 'If we are going to try 
and get back on to our course, we must cross at once and bear right.' 

They waded the stream, and hurried over a wide open space, rush-grown 

trees: tall oaks, for the most part, with here and there an elm tree or an 
ash. The ground was fairly level, and there was little undergrowth; but the 
trees were loo close for them to see far ahead. The leaves blew upwards in 

Then the wind died away and the rain came streaming down. They trudged 


as fast as they could, over patches of grass, and through thick drifts of 
old leaves; and all about them the rain pattered and trickled. They did not 


After half an hour Pippin said: 'I hope we have not turned too much 
towards the south, and are not walking longwise through this wood! It is not 

and we ought to have been through it by now.' 

'It is no good our starting to go in zig-zags,' said Frodo. 'That won't 

come out into the open yet.' 


out of ragged clouds again and the rain lessened. It was now past mid-day, 
and they felt it was high time for lunch. They halted under an elm tree: its 
leaves though fast turning yellow were still thick, and the ground at its 
feel was fairly dry and sheltered. When they came to make their meal, they 

golden in colour: it had the scent of a honey made of many flowers, and was 
wonderfully refreshing. Very soon they were laughing, and snapping their 
fingers at rain, and at Black Riders. The last few miles, they felt, would 





Frodo propped his back against the tree-trunk, and closed his eyes. Sam 


Ho! Ho! Ho! to the bottle I go 





And many miles be still to go, 





Ho! Ho! Ho! they began again louder. They stopped short suddenly. Frodo 
sprang to his feet. A long-drawn wail came down the wind, like the cry of 
some evil and lonely creature. It rose and fell, and ended on a high 

answered by another cry, fainter and further off, but no less chilling to 
the blood. There was then a silence, broken only by the sound of the wind in 


'And what do you think that was?' Pippin asked at last, trying to speak 

heard in the Shire before.' 


there were words in that cry, though I could not catch them. But no hobbit 


No more was said about it. They were all thinking of the Riders, but no 
one spoke of them. They were now reluctant either to stay or go on; but 
sooner or later they had got to get across the open country to the Ferry, 

shouldered their packs again and were off. 

Before long the wood came to a sudden end. Wide grass-lands stretched 

south. Away over the flats they could glimpse the low hill of Bucklebury 
across the River, but it was now to their left. Creeping cautiously out from 

could. 


behind them stood the high place where they had breakfasted. Frodo half 
expected to see the small distant figure of a horseman on the ridge dark 
against the sky; but there was no sign of one. The sun escaping from the 





brightly again. Their fear left them, though they still felt uneasy. But the 
land became steadily more tame and well-ordered. Soon they came into 
well-tended fields and meadows: there were hedges and gates and dikes for 

the Shire. Their spirits rose with every step. The line of the River grew 
nearer; and the Black Riders began to seem like phantoms of the woods now 


They passed along the edge of a huge turnip-field, and came to a stout 

distant clump of trees. Pippin stopped. 

'I know these fields and this gate!' he said. 'This is Bamfurlong, old 


'One trouble after another!' said Frodo, looking nearly as much alarmed 
as if Pippin had declared the lane was the slot leading to a dragon's den. 



'What's wrong with old Maggot?' asked Pippin. 'He's a good friend to 
all the Brandy bucks. Of course he's a terror to trespassers, and keeps 

to be more on their guard.' 


laugh, 'I am terrified of him and his dogs. I have avoided his farm for 
years and years. He caught me several times trespassing after mushrooms, 
when I was a youngster at Brandy Hall. On the last occasion he beat me, and 

this young varmint sets foot on my land, you can eat him. Now see him off!" 
They chased me all the way to the Ferry. I have never got over the fright - 
though I daresay the beasts knew their business and would not really have 


Pippin laughed. 'Well, it's time you made it up. Especially if you are 

you leave his mushrooms alone. Fet's get into the lane and then we shan't be 
trespassing. If we meet him, I'll do the talking. He is a friend of Merry's, 


They went along the lane, until they saw the thatched roofs of a large 
house and farm-buildings peeping out among the trees ahead. The Maggots, 


the Puddifoots of Stock, and most of the inhabitants of the Marish, were 




house-dwellers; and this farm was stoutly built of brick and had a high wall 



Suddenly as they drew nearer a terrific baying and barking broke out, 
and a loud voice was heard shouting: ’Grip! Fang! Wolf! Come on, lads!' 

Frodo and Sam stopped dead, but Pippin walked on a few paces. The gate 

towards the travellers, barking fiercely. They took no notice of Pippin; but 
Sam shrank against the wall, while two wolvish-looking dogs sniffed at him 
suspiciously, and snarled if he moved. The largest and most ferocious of the 


Through the gate there now appeared a broad thick -set hobbit with a 
round red face. 'Hallo! Hallo! And who may you be, and what may you be 




The farmer looked at him closely. 'Well, if it isn't Master Pippin - 
Mr. Peregrin Took, I should say!' he cried, changing from a scowl to a grin. 
'It's a long time since I saw you round here. It's lucky for you that I know 

funny things going on today. Of course, we do get queer folk wandering in 
these parts at times. Too near the River,' he said, shaking his head. 'But 
this fellow was the most outlandish I have ever set eyes on. He won't cross 


'What fellow do you mean?' asked Pippin. 


towards the causeway not a long while back. He was a funny customer and 
asking funny questions. But perhaps you'll come along inside, and we'll pass 
the news more comfortable. I've a drop of good ale on tap, if you and your 


It seemed plain that the farmer would tell them more, if allowed to do 

about the dogs?' asked Frodo anxiously. 



Here, Grip! Fang! Heel!' he cried. 'Heel, Wolf!' To the relief of Frodo and 
Sam, the dogs walked away and let them go free. 


said. 'You may not remember him, but he used to live at Brandy Hall.' At the 




name Baggins the farmer started, and gave Frodo a sharp glance. For a moment 
Frodo thought that the memory of stolen mushrooms had been aroused, and 


the dogs would be told to see him off. But Farmer Maggot took him by the 



it? Come inside! We must have a talk.' 

They went into the farmer's kitchen, and sat by the wide fire-place. 


was a good brew, and Pippin found himself more than compensated for 


the Golden Perch. Sam sipped his beer suspiciously. He had a natural 
mistrust of the inhabitants of other parts of the Shire; and also he was not 



After a few remarks about the weather and the agricultural prospects 
(which were no worse than usual), Farmer Maggot put down his mug and 




'Now, Mr. Peregrin,' he said, 'where might you be coming from, and 
where might you be going to? Were you coming to visit' me? For, if so, you 


'Well, no,' answered Pippin. 'To tell you the truth, since you have 
guessed it, we got into the lane from the other end: we had come over your 

near Woodhall, trying to take a short cut to the Ferry.' 

'If you were in a hurry, the road would have served you better,' said 

my land, if you have a mind, Mr. Peregrin. And you, Mr. Baggins - though I 
daresay you still like mushrooms.' He laughed. 'Ah yes, I recognized the 
name. I recollect the time when young Frodo Baggins was one of the worst 

just heard the name Baggins before you turned up. What do you think that 


They waited anxiously for him to go on. 'Well,' the farmer continued, 
approaching his point with slow relish, 'he came riding on a big black horse 
in at the gate, which happened to be open, and right up to my door. All 





to be known. "Now what in the Shire can he want?" I thought to myself. We 
don't see many of the Big Folk over the border; and anyway I had never heard 


' "Good-day to you!" I says, going out to him. "This lane don’t lead 
anywhere, and wherever you may be going, your quickest way will be back to 
the road." I didn't like the looks of him; and when Grip came out, he took 

and bolted off howling. The black fellow sat quite still. 

' "I come from yonder," he said, slow and stiff-like, pointing back 

queer voice, and bent down towards me. I could not see any face, for his 
hood fell down so low; and I felt a sort of shiver down my back. But I did 


' "Be off!" I said. "There are no Bagginses here. You're in the wrong 
part of the Shire. You had better go back west to Hobbiton - but you can go 


' "Baggins has left," he answered in a whisper. "He is coming. He is 
not far away. I wish to find him. If he passes will you tell me? I will come 



quick. I give you one minute before I call all my dogs." 

'He gave a sort of hiss. It might have been laughing, and it might not. 

Then he spurred his great horse right at me, and I jumped out of the way 

gate and up the lane towards the causeway like a bolt of thunder. What do 


Frodo sat for a moment looking at the fire, but his only thought was 
how on earth would they reach the Ferry. 'I don't know what to think,' he 


'Then I'll tell you what to think,' said Maggot. 'You should never have 

there.' Sam stirred in his chair, and looked at the farmer with an 
unfriendly eye. 'But you were always a reckless lad. When I heard you had 
left the Brandybucks and gone off to that old Mr. Bilbo, I said that you 

doings of Mr. Bilbo's. His money was got in some strange fashion in foreign 




parts, they say. Maybe there is some that want to know what has become of 
the gold and jewels that he buried in the hill of Hobbiton, as I hear?' 




'Well, Mr. Frodo,' Maggot went on, 'I'm glad that you've had the sense 
to come back to Buckland. My advice is: stay there! And don't get mixed up 
with these outlandish folk. You'll have friends in these parts. If any of 

you're dead, or have left the Shire, or anything you like. And that might be 
true enough; for as like as not it is old Mr. Bilbo they want news of.' 

'Maybe you're right,' said Frodo, avoiding the farmer's eye and staring 


Maggot looked at him thoughtfully. 'Well, I see you have ideas of your 

that rider here on the same afternoon; and maybe my news was no great news 
to you, after all. I am not asking you to tell me anything you have a mind 
to keep to yourself; but I see you are in some kind of trouble. Perhaps you 


'I was thinking so,' said Frodo. But we have got to try and get there; 
and it won't be done by sitting and thinking. Sol am afraid we must be 
going. Thank you very much indeed for your kindness! I've been in terror of 

to hear it. It's a pity: for I've missed a good friend. And now I'm sorry to 
leave so soon. But I'll come back, perhaps, one day - if I get a chance.' 

'You'll be welcome when you come,' said Maggot. 'But now I've a notion. 

mostly go to bed soon after the Sun. If you and Mr. Peregrin and all could 
stay and have a bite with us, we would be pleased!' 


afraid. Even now it will be dark before we can reach the Ferry.' 

'Ah! but wait a minute! I was going to say: after a bit of supper, I'll 

you a good step, and it might also save you trouble of another sort.' 

Frodo now accepted the invitation gratefully, to the relief of Pippin 
and Sam. The sun was already behind the western hills, and the light was 

generous supper was laid on the large table. The kitchen was lit with 




candles and the fire was mended. Mrs. Maggot hustled in and out. One or two 
other hobbits belonging to the farm-household came in. In a short while 

mushrooms and bacon, besides much other solid farmhouse fare. The dogs lay 
by the fire and gnawed rinds and cracked bones. 


and got the waggon ready. It was dark in the yard, when the guests came out. 
They threw their packs on board and climbed in. The farmer sat in the 
driving-seat, and whipped up his two stout ponies. His wife stood in the 


'You be careful of yourself. Maggot!' she called. 'Don't go arguing 


'I will!' said he, and drove out of the gate. There was now no breath 



came to an end, crossing a deep dike, and climbing a short slope up on to 


Maggot got down and took a good look either way, north and south, but 
nothing could be seen in the darkness, and there was not a sound in the 

crawling over the fields. 


till I turn for home. We'll hear anything on the road long before we meet it 


It was five miles or more from Maggot's lane to the Ferry. The hobbits 
wrapped themselves up, but their ears were strained for any sound above the 
creak of the wheels and the slow clop of the ponies' hoofs. The waggon 

sleep; but Sam was staring forwards into the rising fog. 

They reached the entrance to the Ferry lane at last. It was marked by 

drew in his ponies and the waggon creaked to a halt. They were just 
beginning lo scramble out, when suddenly they heard what they had all been 
dreading: hoofs on the road ahead. The sound was coming towards them. 


forward into the gloom. Clip-clop, clip-clop came the approaching rider. The 
fall of the hoofs sounded loud in the still, foggy air. 





in the waggon and cover up with blankets, and we'll send this rider to the 
rightabouts!' He climbed out and went to the farmer's side. Black Riders 


Clop-clop, clop-clop. The rider was nearly on them. 

'Hallo there!' called Farmer Maggot. The advancing hoofs stopped short. 

or two ahead. 'Now then!' said the farmer, throwing the reins to Sam and 
striding forward. 'Don't you come a step nearer! What do you want, and where 


'I want Mr. Baggins. Have you seen him?' said a muffled voice - but the 
voice was the voice of Merry Brandybuck. A dark lantern was uncovered, and 




'Yes, of course! Who did you think it was?' said Merry coming forward. 

As he came out of the mist and their fears subsided, he seemed suddenly to 
diminish to ordinary hobbit-size. He was riding a pony, and a scarf was 


Frodo sprang out of the waggon to greet him. 'So there you are at 
last!' said Merry. 'I was beginning to wonder if you would turn up at all 
today, and I was just going back to supper. When it grew foggy I came across 

blest if I know which way you have come. Where did you find them, Mr. 


'No, I caught 'em trespassing,' said the farmer, 'and nearly set my 
dogs on 'em; but they'll tell you all the story, I've no doubt. Now, if 

home. Mrs. Maggot will be worriting with the night getting thick.' 

He backed the waggon into the lane and turned it. 'Well, good night to 
you all,' he said. 'It's been a queer day, and no mistake. But all's well as 

doors. I'll not deny that I'll be glad now when I do.' He lit his lanterns, 
and got up. Suddenly he produced a large basket from under the seat. 'I was 
nearly forgetting,' he said. 'Mrs. Maggot put this up for Mr. Baggins, with 

thanks and good-nights. 






dwindled into the foggy night. Suddenly Frodo laughed: from the covered 
basket he held, the scent of mushrooms was rising. 








'Now we had better get home ourselves,' said Merry. There's something 


They turned down the Ferry lane, which was straight and well-kept and 
edged with large white- washed stones. In a hundred yards or so it brought 
them to the river -bank, where there was a broad wooden landing-stage. A 

water's edge glimmered in the light of two lamps on high posts. Behind them 
the mists in the flat fields were now above the hedges; but the water before 
them was dark, with only a few curling wisps like steam among the reeds by 


Merry led the pony over a gangway on to the ferry, and the others 
followed. Merry then pushed slowly off with a long pole. The Brandywine 

up it a winding path climbed from the further landing. Lamps were twinkling 
there. Behind loomed up the Buck Hill; and out of it, through stray shrouds 
of mist, shone many round windows, yellow and red. They were the windows 




Long ago Gorhendad Oldbuck, head of the Oldbuck family, one of the 
oldest in the Marish or indeed in the Shire, had crossed the river, which 
was the original boundary of the land eastwards. He built (and excavated) 

master of what was virtually a small independent country. His family grew 
and grew, and after his days continued to grow, until Brandy Hall occupied 
the whole of the low hill, and had three large front-doors, many side-doors, 



then began to burrow, and later to build, all round about. That was the 
origin of Buckland, a thickly inhabited strip between the river and the Old 
Forest, a sort of colony from the Shire. Its chief village was Bucklebury, 


The people in the Marish were friendly with the Bucklanders, and the 
authority of the Master of the Hall (as the head of the Brandybuck family 





But most of the folk of the old Shire regarded the Bucklanders as peculiar, 
half foreigners as it were. Though, as a matter of fact, they were not very 
different from the other hobbits of the Four Farthings. Except in one point: 


Their land was originally unprotected from the East; but on that side 
they had built a hedge: the High Hay. It had been planted many generations 
ago, and was now thick and tail, for it was constantly tended. It ran all 

to Haysend (where the Withywindle flowed out of the Forest into the 
Brandywine): well over twenty miles from end to end. But, of course, it was 

places. The Bucklanders kept their doors locked after dark, and that also 


The ferry-boat moved slowly across the water. The Buckland shore drew 
nearer. Sam was the only member of the party who had not been over the river 
before. He had a strange feeling as the slow gurgling stream slipped by: his 
old life lay behind in the mists, dark adventure lay in front. He scratched 

on living quietly at Bag End. 


Pippin was already leading the pony up the path, when Sam (who had been 
looking back, as if to take farewell of the Shire) said in a hoarse whisper: 



On the far stage, under the distant lamps, they could just make out a 
figure: it looked like a dark black bundle left behind. But as they looked 
it seemed to move and sway this way and that, as if searching the ground. It 


'What in the Shire is that?' exclaimed Merry. 


now! Let's get away at once!' They hurried up the path to the top of the 
bank, but when they looked back the far shore was shrouded in mist, and 


'Thank goodness you don't keep any boats on the west -bank!' said Frodo. 


'They can go twenty miles north to Brandywine Bridge - or they might 
swim,' answered Merry. 'Though I never heard of any horse swimming the 





get indoors and then we can talk.' 

'All right! You and Pippin know your way; so I'll just ride on and tell 


'We had our supper early with Farmer Maggot,' said Frodo; 'but we could 


'You shall have it! Give me that basket!' said Merry, and rode ahead 


It was some distance from the Brandywine to Frodo's new house at 
Crickhollow. They passed Buck Hill and Brandy Hall on their left, and on the 

the Bridge. Half a mile northward along this they came to a lane opening on 
their right. This they followed for a couple of miles as it climbed up and 


At last they came to a narrow gate in a thick hedge. Nothing could be 
seen of the house in the dark: it stood back from the lane in the middle of 

hedge. Frodo had chosen it, because it stood in an out-of-the-way corner of 
the country, and there were no other dwellings close by. You could get in 
and out without being noticed. It had been built a long while before by the 

escape from the crowded life of Brandy Hall for a time. It was an 
old-fashioned countrified house, as much like a hobbit-hole as possible: it 
was long and low, with no upper storey; and it had a roof of turf, round 


As they walked lip the green path from the gate no light was visible; 

Bolger opened it. A friendly light streamed out. They slipped in quickly and 
shut themselves and the light inside. They were in a wide hall with doors on 
either side; in front of them a passage ran back down the middle of the 


'Well, what do you think of it?' asked Merry coming up the passage. 'We 

Fatty and I only got here with the last cart-load yesterday.' 

Frodo looked round. It did look like home. Many of his own favourite 

selling) - were arranged as nearly as possible as they had been at Bag End. 




It was a pleasant, comfortable, welcoming place; and he found himself 
wishing that he was really coming here to settle down in quiet retirement. 


wondered again how he was going to break the news to them that he must leave 
them so soon, indeed at once. Yet that would have to be done that very 


'It's delightful!' he said with an effort. 'I hardly feel that I have 


The travellers hung up their cloaks, and piled their packs on the 
floor. Merry led them down the passage and threw open a door at the far end. 




'Which order shall we go in?' said Frodo. 'Eldest first, or quickest 
first? You'll be last either way, Master Peregrin.' 


begin life at Crickhollow with a quarrel over baths. In that room there are 
three tubs, and a copper full of boiling water. There are also towels, mats 


Merry and Fatty went into the kitchen on the other side of the passage, 
and busied themselves with the final preparations for a late supper. 

of 


the others in one of Bilbo's favourite bath-songs. 


that washes the weary mud away! 





O! Sweet is the sound of falling rain, 

but better than rain or rippling streams 



down a thirsty throat and be glad indeed; 













but never did fountain sound so sweet 



There was a terrific splash, and a shout of Whoa! from Frodo. It 

high. 


called. Frodo came out drying his hair. 


finish,' he said. 


ought to mop all that up before you get anything to eat. Peregrin,' he said. 


They had supper in the kitchen on a table near the fire. 'I suppose you 
three won't want mushrooms again?' said Fredegar without much hope. 



'They're mine!' said Frodo. 'Given to me by Mrs. Maggot, a queen among 
farmers' wives. Take your greedy hands away, and I'll serve them.' 


likings of Big People. A fact which partly explains young Frodo's long 
expeditions to the renowned fields of the Marish, and the wrath of the 
injured Maggot. On this occasion there was plenty for all, even according to 

had finished even Fatty Bolger heaved a sigh of content. They pushed back 
the table, and drew chairs round the fire. 


that you have been having adventures, which was not quite fair without me. I 
want a full account; and most of all I want to know what was the matter with 
old Maggot, and why he spoke to me like that. He sounded almost as if he was 


'We have all been scared,' said Pippin after a pause, in which Frodo 

been chased for two days by Black Riders.' 






'Black figures riding on black horses,' answered Pippin. 'If Frodo 
won't talk, I will tell you the whole tale from the beginning.' He then gave 

gave various supporting nods and exclamations. Frodo remained silent. 

'I should think you were making it all up,' said Merry, 'if I had not 
seen that black shape on the landing-stage - and heard the queer sound in 


'Cousin Frodo has been very close,' said Pippin. 'But the time has come 
for him to open out. So far we have been given nothing more to go on than 



'That was only a guess,' said Frodo hastily. 'Maggot does not know 


'Old Maggot is a shrewd fellow,' said Merry. 'A lot goes on behind his 
round face that does not come out in his talk. I've heard that he used to go 

many strange things. But you can at least tell us, Frodo, whether you think 


'I think, ' answered Frodo slowly, 'that it was a good guess, as far as 
it goes. There is a connexion with Bilbo's old adventures, and the Riders 
are looking, or perhaps one ought to say searching, for him or for me. I 

safe here or anywhere else.' He looked round at the windows and walls, as if 
he was afraid they would suddenly give way. The others looked at him in 
silence, and exchanged meaning glances among themselves. 



'Well!' said Frodo at last, sitting up and straightening his back, as 
if he had made a decision. 'I can't keep it dark any longer. I have got 


'I think I could help you,' said Merry quietly, 'by telling you some of 


'What do you mean?' said Frodo, looking at him anxiously. 'Just this, 
my dear old Frodo: you are miserable, because you don't know how to say 

you sooner than you expected, and now you are making up your mind to go at 
once. And you don't want to. We are very sorry for you.' 

Frodo opened his mouth and shut it again. His look of surprise was so 





think you had thrown dust in all our eyes? You have not been nearly careful 
or clever enough for that! You have obviously been planning to go and saying 
farewell to all your haunts all this year since April. We have constantly 

wonder", and things like that. And pretending that you had come to the end 
of your money, and actually selling your beloved Bag End to those 


'Good heavens!' said Frodo. 'I thought I had been both careful and 
clever. I don't know what Gandalf would say. Is all the Shire discussing my 


'Oh no!' said Merry. 'Don't worry about that! The secret won't keep for 

conspirators. After all, you must remember that we know you well, and are 
often with you. We can usually guess what you are thinking. I knew Bilbo, 
too. To tell you the truth, I had been watching you rather closely ever 

expected you to go sooner, and lately we have been very anxious. We have 
been terrified that you might give us the slip, and go off suddenly, all on 
your own like he did. Ever since this spring we have kept our eyes open, and 

so easily!' 


wretched for us all, but it is no use your trying to keep me. Since you have 
guessed so much, please help me and do not hinder me!' 


must, too. Merry and I are coming with you. Sam is an excellent fellow, and 
would jump down a dragon's throat to save you, if he did not trip over his 
own feet; but you will need more than one companion in your dangerous 



could not allow it. I decided that long ago, too. You speak of danger, but 
you do not understand. This is no treasure-hunt, no there-and -back journey. 

I am flying from deadly peril into deadly peril.' 


decided to come. We know the Ring is no laughing -matter; but we are going to 







'Yes, the Ring,' said Merry. 'My dear old hobbit, you don't allow for 

for years - before Bilbo went away, in fact; but since he obviously regarded 
it as secret, I kept the knowledge in my head, until we formed our 
conspiracy. I did not know Bilbo, of course, as well as I know you; I was 

you want to know how I first found out, I will tell you.' 



'It was the Sackville-Bagginses that were his downfall, as you might 
expect. One day, a year before the Party, I happened to be walking along the 
road, when I saw Bilbo ahead. Suddenly in the distance the S.-B.s appeared, 

was so startled that I hardly had the wits to hide myself in a more ordinary 
fashion; but I got through the hedge and walked along the field inside. I 
was peeping through into the road, after the S.-B.s had passed, and was 

gold as he put something back in his trouser -pocket. 

'After that I kept my eyes open. In fact, I confess that I spied. But 

must be the only one in the Shire, besides you Frodo, that has ever seen the 


'You have read his book!' cried Frodo. 'Good heavens above! Is nothing 


'Not too safe, I should say,' said Merry. 'But I have only had one 
rapid glance, and that was difficult to get. He never left the book about. I 

Frodo?' 



'Well, as I was saying,' Merry proceeded, 'I kept my knowledge to 
myself, till this Spring when things got serious. Then we formed our 

been too scrupulous. You are not a very easy nut to crack, and Gandalf is 
worse. But if you want to be introduced to our chief investigator, I can 


'Where is he?' said Frodo, looking round, as if he expected a masked 





’Step forward, Sam!' said Merry; and Sam stood up with a face scarlet 
up to the ears. 'Here's our collector of information ! And he collected a 

he seemed to regard himself as on parole, and dried up.' 

'Sam!' cried Frodo, feeling that amazement could go no further, and 

foolish. 


to you, Mr. Frodo, nor to Mr. Gandalf for that matter. He has some sense, 
mind you; and when you said go alone, he said no! lake someone as you can 


'But it does not seem that I can trust anyone,' said Frodo. Sam looked 

trust us to stick to you through thick and thin - to the bitter end. And you 
can trust us to keep any secret of yours - closer than you keep it yourself. 

But you cannot trust us to let you face trouble alone, and go off without a 

Gandalf has told you. We know a good deal about the Ring. We are horribly 
afraid - but we are coming with you; or following you like hounds.' 

'And after all, sir,' added Sam, 'you did ought to take the Elves' 



'I don't deny it,' said Frodo, looking at Sam, who was now grinning. 'I 
don't deny it, but I'll never believe you are sleeping again, whether you 


'You are a set of deceitful scoundrels!' he said, turning to the 
others. 'But bless you!' he laughed, getting up and waving his arms, 'I give 
in. I will take Gildor's advice. If the danger were not so dark, I should 

felt for a long time. I had dreaded this evening.' 

'Good! That's settled. Three cheers for Captain Frodo and company!' 

which they had apparently got ready for the occasion. 

It was made on the model of the dwarf-song that started Bilbo on his 




Though wind may blow and rain may fall, 





Far over wood and mountain tall. 






Through moor and waste we ride in haste, 





Beneath the sky shall be our bed, 



Our journey done, our errand sped. 





'Very good!' said Frodo. 'But in that case there are a lot of things to 
do before we go to bed - under a roof, for tonight at any rate.' 





sure it is unsafe to stay in one place long, especially in a place to which 
it is known I was going. Also Gildor advised me not to wait. But I should 

when he heard that Gandalf had never appeared. It really depends on two 
things. Flow soon could the Riders get to Bucklebury? And how soon could 


get off? It will take a good deal of preparation.' 


off in an hour. I have prepared practically everything. There are six ponies 
in a stable across the fields; stores and tackle are all packed, except for 


'It seems to have been a very efficient conspiracy,' said Frodo. 'But 
what about the Black Riders? Would it be safe to wait one day for Gandalf?' 


you here,' answered Merry. 'They could have reached here by now, of course, 
if they were not stopped at the North-gate, where the Hedge runs down to the 
river -bank, just this side of the Bridge. The gate-guards would not let them 




through by night, though they might break through. Even in the daylight they 

through to the Master of the Hall - for they would not like the look of the 
Riders, and would certainly be frightened by them. But, of course, Buckland 
cannot resist a determined attack for long. And it is possible that in the 

let through. It is pretty generally known that you are coming back to live 


Frodo sat for a while in thought. 'I have made up my mind,' he said 
finally. 'I am starting tomorrow, as soon as it is light. But I am not going 
by road: it would be safer to wait here than that. If I go through the 

being secret for several days at least, as it might be. And what is more, 
the Bridge and the East Road near the borders will certainly be watched, 
whether any Rider gets into Buckland or not. We don't know how many there 

to go off in a quite unexpected direction.' 


horrified. 'You can't be thinking of doing that. It is quite as dangerous as 


'Not quite,' said Merry. It sounds very desperate, but I believe Frodo 
is right. It is the only way of getting off without being followed at once. 



'But you won't have any luck in the Old Forest,' objected Fredegar. 'No 
one ever has luck in there. You'll gel lost. People don't go in there.' 

'Oh yes they do!' said Merry. 'The Brandybucks go in - occasionally 

long ago. I have been in several times: usually in daylight, of course, when 



Old Forest than of anything I know about: the stories about it are a 
nightmare; but my vote hardly counts, as I am not going on the journey. 


you have done, when he turns up, as I am sure he will before long.' 

Fond as he was of Frodo, Fatty Bolger had no desire to leave the Shire, 
nor to see what lay outside it. His family came from the Eastfarthing, from 





Bridge. His task, according to the original plans of the conspirators, was 
to stay behind and deal with inquisitive folk, and to keep up as long as 
possible the pretence that Mr. Baggins was still living at Crickhollow. He 

the part. They little thought how dangerous that part might prove. 

'Excellent!' said Frodo, when he understood the plan. ’We could not 
have left any message behind for Gandalf otherwise. I don't know whether 

a written message, in case they got in and searched the house. But if Fatty 
is willing to hold the fort, and I can be sure of Gandalf knowing the way we 
have gone, that decides me. I am going into the Old Forest first thing 


'Well, that's that,' said Pippin. 'On the whole I would rather have our 


'You wait till you are well inside the Forest,' said Fredegar. 'You'll 


'It's no good arguing about it any more,' said Merry. 'We have still 
got to tidy up and put the finishing touches to the packing, before we get 


When at last he had got to bed, Frodo could not sleep for some time. 

His legs ached. He. was glad that he was riding in the morning. Eventually 
he fell into a vague dream, in which he seemed to be looking out of a high 

was the sound of creatures crawling and snuffling. He felt sure they would 
smell him out sooner or later. 


great wind coming over the leaves of the forest. Then he knew that it was 
not leaves, but the sound of the Sea far-off; a sound he had never heard in 
waking life, though it had often troubled his dreams. Suddenly he found he 

and there was a strange salt smell in the air. Looking up he saw before him 
a tall white tower, standing alone on a high ridge. A great desire came over 
him to climb the tower and see the Sea. He started to struggle up the ridge 

noise of thunder. 








Frodo woke suddenly. It was still dark in the room. Merry was standing 


'All right! What is it?' said Frodo, still shaken and bewildered. 

'What is it!' cried Merry. 'It is time to get up. It is half past four 
and very foggy. Come on! Sam is already getting breakfast ready. Even Pippin 

the baggage-carrier. Wake that sluggard Fatty! At least he must get up and 


Soon after six o'clock the five hobbits were ready to start. Fatty 
Bolger was still yawning. They stole quietly out of the house. Merry went in 

a spinney behind the house, and then cut across several fields. The leaves 
of trees were glistening, and every twig was dripping; the grass was grey 
with cold dew. Everything was still, and far-away noises seemed near and 

house. 


loved by hobbits, not speedy, but good for a long day's work. They mounted, 
and soon they were riding off into the mist, which seemed to open 

about an hour, slowly and without talking, they saw the Fledge looming 
suddenly ahead. It was tall and netted over with silver cobwebs. 'How are 
you going to get through this?' asked Fredegar. 'Follow me!' said Merry, 


came to a point where it bent inwards, running along the lip of a hollow. A 
cutting had been made, at some distance from the Hedge, and went sloping 
gently down into the ground. It had walls of brick at the sides, which rose 

deep under the Hedge and came out in the hollow on the other side. 

Here Fatty Bolger halted. 'Good-bye, Frodo!' he said. 'I wish you were 
not going into the Forest. I only hope you will not need rescuing before the 


'If there are no worse things ahead than the Old Forest, I shall be 
lucky,' said Frodo. 'Tell Gandalf to hurry along the East Road: we shall 





rode down the slope and disappeared from Fredegar's sight into the tunnel. 

It was dark and damp. At the far end it was closed by a gate of 
thick-set iron bars. Merry got down and unlocked the gate, and when they had 

clicked. The sound was ominous. 

’There!’ said Merry. 'You have left the Shire, and are now outside, and 




'I don't know what stories you mean,' Merry answered. 'If you mean the 
old bogey-stories Fatty's nurses used to tell him, about goblins and wolves 
and things of that sort, I should say no. At any rate I don't believe them. 


aware of what is going on, so to speak, than things are in the Shire. And 
the trees do not like strangers. They watch you. They are usually content 
merely to watch you, as long as daylight lasts, and don't do much. 

out, or grasp at you with a long trailer. But at night things can be most 
alarming, or so I am told. I have only once or twice been in here after 
dark, and then only near the hedge. I thought all the trees were whispering 

and the branches swayed and groped without any wind. They do say the trees 
do actually move, and can surround strangers and hem them in. In fact long 
ago they attacked the Hedge: they came and planted themselves right by it, 

made a great bonfire in the Forest, and burned all the ground in a long 
strip east of the Hedge. After that the trees gave up the attack, but they 
became very unfriendly. There is still a wide bare space not far inside 


'Is it only the trees that are dangerous?' asked Pippin. 


far side,' said Merry, 'or at least I have heard so; but I have never seen 
any of them. But something makes paths. Whenever one comes inside one 


open tracks; but they seem to shift and change from time to time in a queer 

beginning of quite a broad path leading to the Bonfire Glade, and then on 




more or less in our direction, east and a little north. That is the path I 


The hobbits now left the tunnel-gate and rode across the wide hollow. 

On the far side was a faint path leading up on to the floor of the Forest, a 

brought them under the trees. Looking back they could see the dark line of 
the Hedge through the stems of trees that were already thick about them. 
Looking ahead they could see only tree-trunks of innumerable sizes and 

gnarled and branched; and all the stems were green or grey with moss and 


Merry alone seemed fairly cheerful. 'You had better lead on and find 
that path,' Frodo said to him. 'Don't let us lose one another, or forget 


They picked a way among the trees, and their ponies plodded along, 

undergrowth. The ground was rising steadily, and as they went forward it 
seemed that the trees became taller, darker, and thicker. There was no 
sound, except an occasional drip of moisture falling through the still 

branches; but they all got an uncomfortable feeling that they were being 
watched with disapproval, deepening to dislike and even enmity. The feeling 
steadily grew, until they found themselves looking up quickly, or glancing 


There was not as yet any sign of a path, and the trees seemed 
constantly to bar their way. Pippin suddenly felt that he could not bear it 

not going to do anything. Just let me pass through, will you!' 

The others halted startled; but the cry fell as if muffled by a heavy 

more 



'I should not shout, if I were you,' said Merry. It does more harm than 


Frodo began to wonder if it were possible to find a way through, and if 

was looking from side to side, and seemed already uncertain which way to go. 




Pippin noticed it. 'It has not taken you long to lose us,' he said. But at 


'Well, well!' he said. 'These trees do shift. There is the Bonfire 
Glade in front of us (or I hope so), but the path to it seems to have moved 


The light grew clearer as they went forward. Suddenly they came out of 
the trees and found themselves in a wide circular space. There was sky above 

had not been able to see the rising morning and the lifting of the mist. The 
sun was not, however, high enough yet to shine down into the clearing, 
though its light was on the tree-tops. The leaves were all thicker and 

wall. No tree grew there, only rough grass and many tall plants: stalky and 
faded hemlocks and wood-parsley, fire-weed seeding into fluffy ashes, and 
rampant nettles and thistles. A dreary place: but it seemed a charming and 


The hobbits felt encouraged, and looked up hopefully at the broadening 

wall of trees, and a clear path beyond it. They could see it running on into 
the wood, wide in places and open above, though every now and again the 
trees drew in and overshadowed it with their dark boughs. Up this path they 

with better heart; for it seemed to them that the Forest had relented, and 
was going to let them pass unhindered after all. 


close again on either side, and they could no longer see far ahead. Now 
stronger than ever they felt again the ill will of the wood pressing on 
them. So silent was it that the fall of their ponies' hoofs, rustling on 

their ears. Frodo tried to sing a song to encourage them, but his voice sank 


O! Wanderers in the shadowed land 


and see the open sun go past: 








Fail - even as he said the word his voice faded into silence. The air 

branch fell from an old overhanging tree with a crash into the path. The 
trees seemed to close in before them. 


should not sing any more at present. Wait till we do get to the edge, and 


He spoke cheerfully, and if he felt any great anxiety, he did not show 
it. The others did not answer. They were depressed. A heavy weight was 
settling steadily on Frodo's heart, and he regretted now with every step 

was, indeed, just about to stop and propose going back (if that was still 
possible), when things took a new turn. The path stopped climbing, and 
became for a while nearly level. The dark trees drew aside, and ahead they 

distance off, there stood a green hill-top, treeless, rising like a bald 
head out of the encircling wood. The path seemed to be making directly for 


They now hurried forward again, delighted with the thought of climbing 

again began to climb upwards, leading them at last to the foot of the steep 
hillside. There it left the trees and faded into the turf. The wood stood 
all round the hill like thick hair that ended sharply in a circle round a 


The hobbits led their ponies up, winding round and round until they 

and sunlit, but hazy; and they could not see to any great distance. Near at 
hand the mist was now almost gone; though here and there it lay in hollows 
of the wood, and to the south of them, out of a deep fold cutting right 


'That,' said Merry, pointing with his hand, 'that is the line of the 
Withywindle. It comes down out of the Downs and flows south-west through 


midst of the Forest to join the Brandywine below Haysend. We don't want to 

whole wood - the centre from which all the queerness comes, as it were.' 




The others looked in the direction that Merry pointed out, but they 
could see little but mists over the damp and deep-cut valley; and beyond it 


The sun on the hill-lop was now getting hot. It must have been about 
eleven o'clock; but the autumn haze still prevented them from seeing much in 

Hedge or the valley of the Brandywine beyond it. Northward, where they 
looked most hopefully, they could see nothing that might be the line of the 
great East Road, for which they were making. They were on an island in a sea 


On the south-eastern side the ground fell very steeply, as if the 

island-shores that really are the sides of a mountain rising out of deep 
waters. They sat on the green edge and looked out over the woods below them, 
while they ate their mid-day meal. As the sun rose and passed noon they 

beyond the Old Forest on that side. That cheered them greatly; for it was 
good to see a sight of anything beyond the wood's borders, though they did 
not mean to go that way, if they could help it: the Barrow-downs had as 


At length they made up their minds to go on again. The path that had 
brought them to the hill reappeared on the northward side; but they had not 

right. Soon it began to descend rapidly and they guessed that it must 
actually be heading towards the Withy windle valley: not at all the direction 
they wished lo take. After some discussion they decided to leave this 

see it from the hill-top, the Road must lie that way, and it could not be 
many miles off. Also northward, and to the left of the path, the land seemed 
lo be drier and more open, climbing up to slopes where the trees were 

and nameless trees of the denser wood. 

At first their choice seemed to be good: they got along at a fair 

seemed unaccountably to have veered eastwards. But after a time the trees 
began to close in again, just where they had appeared from a distance to be 
thinner and less tangled. Then deep folds in the ground were discovered 





roads long disused and choked with brambles. These lay usually right across 
their line of march, and could only be crossed by scrambling down and out 
again, which was troublesome and difficult with their ponies. Each time they 

undergrowth, which somehow would not yield to the left, but only gave way 
when they turned to the right; and they had to go some distance along the 
bottom before they could find a way up the further bank. Each time they 

and upwards it was most difficult to find a way, and they were forced to the 


After an hour or two they had lost all clear sense of direction, though 
they knew well enough that they had long ceased to go northward at all. They 
were being headed off, and were simply following a course chosen for them - 


The afternoon was wearing away when they scrambled and stumbled into a 
fold that was wider and deeper than any they had yet met. It was so sleep 
and overhung that it proved impossible to climb out of it again, either 

behind. All they could do was to follow the fold - downwards. The ground 
grew soft, and in places boggy; springs appeared in the banks, and soon they 
found themselves following a brook that trickled and babbled through a weedy 

noisy, flowed and leaped swiftly downhill. They were in a deep dim-lit gully 
over-arched by trees high above them. 


suddenly out of the gloom. As if through a gate they saw the sunlight before 
them. Coming to the opening they found that they had made their way down 
through a cleft in a high sleep bank, almost a cliff. At its feet was a wide 

almost as steep. A golden afternoon of late sunshine lay warm and drowsy 
upon the hidden land between. In the midst of it there wound lazily a dark 
river of brown water, bordered with ancient willows, arched over with 

willow-leaves. The air was thick with them, fluttering yellow from the 
branches; for there was a warm and gentle breeze blowing softly in the 







'We have come almost in the opposite direction to which we intended. This is 
the River Withy windle! I will go on and explore.' 


After a while he reappeared, and reported that there was fairly solid ground 
between the cliff-foot and the river; in some places firm turf went down to 
the water's edge. 'What's more,' he said, 'there seems to be something like 

follow it, we shall be bound to come out on the east side of the Forest 


'I dare say!' said Pippin. 'That is, if the track goes on so far, and 
does not simply lead us into a bog and leave us there. Who made the track, 

very suspicious of this Forest and everything in it, and I begin to believe 
all the stories about it. And have you any idea how far eastward we should 


'No,' said Merry, 'I haven't. I don't know in the least how far down 
the Withywindle we are, or who could possibly come here often enough to 




There being nothing else for it, they filed out, and Merry led them to 
the path that he had discovered. Everywhere the reeds and grasses were lush 
and tall, in places far above their heads; but once found, the path was easy 

the bogs and pools. Here and there it passed over other rills, running down 
gullies into the Withywindle out of the higher forest-lands, and at these 
points there were tree-trunks or bundles of brushwood laid carefully across. 


kinds buzzing round their ears, and the afternoon sun was burning on their 
backs. At last they came suddenly into a thin shade; great grey branches 
reached across the path. Each step forward became more reluctant than the 

and falling softly out of the air upon their heads and eyes. 

Frodo felt his chin go down and his head nod. Just in front of him 
Pippin fell forward on to his knees. Frodo halted. 'It's no good,' he heard 

under the willows. Less flies!' 





have a nap yet. We must get clear of the Forest first.' But the others were 
too far gone to care. Beside them Sam stood yawning and blinking stupidly. 

Suddenly Frodo himself felt sleep overwhelming him. His head swam. 

Only a gentle noise on the edge of hearing, a soft fluttering as of a song 
half whispered, seemed to stir in the boughs above. He lifted his heavy eyes 
and saw leaning over him a huge willow-tree, old and hoary. Enormous it 

long-fingered hands, its knotted and twisted trunk gaping in wide fissures 
that creaked faintly as the boughs moved. The leaves fluttering against the 
bright sky dazzled him, and he toppled over, lying where he fell upon the 



backs to the willow-trunk. Behind them the great cracks gaped wide to 
receive them as the tree swayed and creaked. They looked up at the grey and 
yellow leaves, moving softly against the light, and singing. They shut their 

saying something about water and sleep. They gave themselves up to the spell 
and fell fast asleep at the foot of the great grey willow. 


him; then with an effort he struggled to his feel again. He felt a 
compelling desire for cool water. 'Wait for me, Sam,' he stammered. 'Must 


Half in a dream he wandered forward to the riverward side of the tree, 
where great winding roots grew out into the stream, like gnarled dragonets 

in the cool brown water; and there he too suddenly fell asleep with his back 


Sam sat down and scratched his head, and yawned like a cavern. He was 
worried. The afternoon was getting late, and he thought this sudden 

muttered to himself. 'I don't like this great big tree. I don't trust it. 

Hark at it singing about sleep now! This won't do at all!' 

He pulled himself to his feet, and staggered off to see what had become 

and he had just caught them and brought them back towards the others, when 




he heard two noises; one loud, and the other soft but very clear. One was 
the splash of something heavy falling into the water; the other was a noise 


He rushed back to the bank. Frodo was in the water close to the edge, 
and a great tree-root seemed to be over him and holding him down, but he was 
not struggling. Sam gripped him by the jacket, and dragged him from under 

he woke, and coughed and spluttered. 


felt it. The big root just twisted round and tipped me in!' 

'You were dreaming I expect, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. 'You shouldn't sit 


'What about the others?' Frodo asked. 'I wonder what sort of dreams 


They went round to the other side of the tree, and then Sam understood 
the click that he had heard. Pippin had vanished. The crack by which he had 

was trapped: another crack had closed about his waist; his legs lay outside, 
but the rest of him was inside a dark opening, the edges of which gripped 


Frodo and Sam beat first upon the tree-trunk where Pippin had lain. 

They then struggled frantically to pull open the jaws of the crack that held 


'What a foul thing to happen!' cried Frodo wildly. 'Why did we ever 

kicked the tree with all his strength, heedless of his own feet. A hardly 
perceptible shiver ran through the stem and up into the branches; the leaves 
rustled and whispered, but with a sound now of faint and far-off laughter. 




'I brought a little hatchet for chopping firewood,' said Frodo. 'That 


'Wait a minute!' cried Sam, struck by an idea suggested by firewood. 









'We might try to hurt or frighten this tree to begin with,' said Sam 
fiercely. 'If it don't let them go, I'll have it down, if I have to gnaw 
it.' He ran to the ponies and before long came back with two tinder-boxes 


Quickly they gathered dry grass and leaves, and bits of bark; and made 

trunk on the far side of the tree from the prisoners. As soon as Sam had 
struck a spark into the tinder, it kindled the dry grass and a flurry of 

against the dry scored rind of the ancient tree and scorched it. A tremor 
ran through the whole willow. The leaves seemed to hiss above their heads 
with a sound of pain and anger. A loud scream came from Merry, and from far 


'Put it out! Put it out!' cried Merry. 'He'll squeeze me in two, if you 


'Who? What?' shouted Frodo, rushing round to the other side of the 


'Put it out! Put it out!' begged Merry. The branches of the willow 
began to sway violently. There was a sound as of a wind rising and spreading 

had dropped a stone into the quiet slumber of the river -valley and set up 
ripples of anger that ran out over the whole Forest. Sam kicked at the 
little fire and stamped out the sparks. But Frodo, without any clear idea of 

help! It seemed to him that he could hardly hear the sound of his own shrill 
voice: it was blown away from him by the willow-wind and drowned in a 
clamour of leaves, as soon as the words left his mouth. He felt desperate: 



seemed to come from behind him, away down the path further back in the 
Forest. He turned round and listened, and soon there could be no doubt: 
someone was singing a song; a deep glad voice was singing carelessly and 




Ring a dong! hop along! fal lal the willow! 






Half hopeful and half afraid of some new danger, Frodo and Sam now both 
stood still. Suddenly out of a long string of nonsense-words (or so they 


Hey! Come merry dot ! derry dol! My darling! 









Slender as the willow-wand, clearer than the water. 









Poor old Willow-man, you tuck your roots away! 



Tom's going home again water-lilies bringing. 



Frodo and Sam stood as if enchanted. The wind puffed out. The leaves 
hung silently again on stiff branches. There was another burst of song, and 
then suddenly, hopping and dancing along the path, there appeared above the 

the band. With another hop and a bound there came into view a man, or so it 
seemed. At any rate he was too large and heavy for a hobbit, if not quite 
tall enough for one of the Big People, though he made noise enough for one, 

through grass and rushes like a cow going down to drink. He had a blue coat 
and a long brown beard; his eyes were blue and bright, and his face was red 
as a ripe apple, but creased into a hundred wrinkles of laughter. In his 

water-lilies. 




'Whoa! Whoa! steady there!’ cried the old man, holding up one hand, and 
they stopped short, as if they had been struck stiff. 'Now, my little 
fellows, where be you a-going to, puffing like a bellows? What's the matter 






trouble! Tom's in a hurry now. Don't you crush my lilies!' 

'My friends are caught in the willow-tree,' cried Frodo breathlessly. 



'What?' shouted Tom Bombadil, leaping up in the air. 'Old Man Willow? 
Naught worse than that, eh? That can soon be mended. I know the tune for 

himself. I'll sing his roots off. I'll sing a wind up and blow leaf and 
branch away. Old Man Willow!' Setting down his lilies carefully on the 
grass, he ran to the tree. There he saw Merry's feet still sticking out - 

crack and began singing into it in a low voice. They could not catch the 
words, but evidently Merry was aroused. His legs began to kick. Tom sprang 
away, and breaking off a hanging branch smote the side of the willow with 

a-thinking of? You should not be waking. Eat earth! Dig deep! Drink water! 
Go to sleep! Bombadil is talking!' He then seized Merry's feet and drew him 


There was a tearing creak and the other crack split open, and out of it 
Pippin sprang, as if he had been kicked. Then with a loud snap both cracks 

complete silence fell. 



Tom Bombadil burst out laughing. 'Well, my little fellows!' said he, 
stooping so that he peered into their faces. 'You shall come home with me! 

butter. Goldberry is waiting. Time enough for questions around the supper 
table. You follow after me as quick as you are able!' With that he picked up 
his lilies, and then with a beckoning wave of his hand went hopping and 


Too surprised and too relieved to talk, the hobbits followed after him 
as fast as they could. But that was not fast enough. Tom soon disappeared in 
front of them, and the noise of his singing got fainter and further away. 


Hop along, my little friends, up the Withywindle! 



Down west sinks the Sun: soon you will be groping. 






Out of the window-panes light will twinkle yellow. 



Fear neither root nor bough! Tom goes on before you. 



After that the hobbits heard no more. Almost at once the sun seemed to 
sink into the trees behind them. They thought of the slanting light of 
evening glittering on the Brandywine River, and the windows of Bucklebury 

trunks and branches of trees hung dark and threatening over the path. White 
mists began to rise and curl on the surface of the river and stray about the 
roots of the trees upon its borders. Out of the very ground at their feet a 


It became difficult to follow the path, and they were very tired. Their 
legs seemed leaden. Strange furtive noises ran among the bushes and reeds on 
either side of them; and if they looked up to the pale sky, they caught 

twilight, and leered down at them from the high bank and the edges of the 
wood. They began to feel that all this country was unreal, and that they 
were stumbling through an ominous dream that led to no awakening. 


that the ground was gently rising. The water began to murmur. In the 
darkness they caught the white glimmer of foam, where the river flowed over 
a short fall. Then suddenly the trees came to an end and the mists were left 

welling up before them. The river, now small and swift, was leaping merrily 
down to meet them, glinting here and there in the light of the stars, which 


The grass under their feet was smooth and short, as if it had been mown 
or shaven. The eaves of the Forest behind were clipped, and trim as a hedge. 

wound up on to the top of a grassy knoll, now grey under the pale starry 
night; and there, still high above them on a further slope, they saw the 
twinkling lights of a house. Down again the path went, and then up again, up 

beam flowed out brightly from a door that was opened. There was Tom 
Bombadil’s house before them, up, down, under hill. Behind it a steep 
shoulder of the land lay grey and bare, and beyond that the dark shapes of 






They all hurried forward, hobbits and ponies. Already half their 
weariness and all their fears had fallen from them. Hey! Come merry dol! 




Hobbits! Ponies all! We are fond of parties. 



Then another clear voice, as young and as ancient as Spring, like the 
song of a glad water flowing down into the night from a bright morning in 


Now let the song begin! Let us sing together 



Light on the budding leaf, dew on the feather, 



Reeds by the shady pool, lilies on the water: 



And with that song the hobbits stood upon the threshold, and a golden 





Chapter 7 . In the House of Tom Bombadil 




still, blinking. They were in a long low room, filled with the light of 
lamps swinging from the beams of the roof; and on the table of dark polished 
wood stood many candles, tall and yellow, burning brightly. 


woman. Her long yellow hair rippled down her shoulders; her gown was 


green as young reeds, shot with silver like beads of dew; and her belt was 
of gold, shaped like a chain of flag-lilies set with the pale-blue eyes of 

earthenware, white water-lilies were floating, so that she seemed to be 


’Enter, good guests!' she said, and as she spoke they knew that it was 
her clear voice they had heard singing. They came a few timid steps further 
into the room, and began to bow low, feeling strangely surprised and 

water, have been answered by a fair young elf-queen clad in living flowers. 
But before they could say anything, she sprang lightly up and over the 
lily -bowls, and ran laughing towards them; and as she ran her gown rustled 


’Come dear folk!' she said, taking Frodo by the hand. Faugh and be 
merry! I am Goldberry, daughter of the River.' Then lightly she passed them 

out across it. 'Let us shut out the night!' she said. 'For you are still 
afraid, perhaps, of mist and tree-shadows and deep water, and untame things. 
Fear nothing! For tonight you are under the roof of Tom Bombadil.' 


smiled. 'Fair lady Goldberry!' said Frodo at last, feeling his heart moved 
with a joy that he did not understand. He stood as he had at times stood 
enchanted by fair el ven- voices; but the spell that was now laid upon him was 

mortal heart; marvellous and yet not strange. 'Fair lady Goldberry!' he said 
again. 'Now the joy that was hidden in the songs we heard is made plain to 






O slender as a willow-wand! O clearer than clear water ! 



O spring-time and summer-time, and spring again after! 



Suddenly he stopped and stammered, overcome with surprise to hear 


'Welcome!' she said. 'I had not heard that folk of the Shire were so 
sweet -tongued. But I see you are an elf-friend; the light in your eyes and 
the ring in your voice tells it. This is a merry meeting! Sit now, and wait 

beasts.' 


busied herself about the table; and their eyes followed her, for the slender 
grace of her movement filled them with quiet delight. From somewhere behind 
the house came the sound of singing. Every now and again they caught, among 


Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow; 



'Fair lady!' said Frodo again after a while. 'Tell me, if my asking 


'He is,' said Goldberry, staying her swift movements and smiling. 

Frodo looked at her questioningly. 'He is, as you have seen him,' she 
said in answer to his look. 'He is the Master of wood, water, and hill.' 



'No indeed!' she answered, and her smile faded. 'That would indeed be a 
burden,' she added in a low voice, as if to herself. 'The trees and the 

themselves. Tom Bombadil is the Master. No one has ever caught old Tom 
walking in the forest, wading in the water, leaping on the hill-tops under 


A door opened and in came Tom Bombadil. He had now no hat and his 


brown hair was crowned with autumn leaves. He laughed, and going to 


'Here's my pretty lady!' he said, bowing to the hobbits. 'Here's my 






milk, cheese, and green herbs and ripe berries gathered. Is that enough for 


'It is,' said Goldberry; 'but the guests perhaps are not?' 

Tom clapped his hands and cried: 'Tom, Tom! your guests are tired, and 

you! You shall clean grimy hands, and wash your weary faces; cast off your 
muddy cloaks and comb out your tangles!' 


round a sharp turn. They came to a low room with a sloping roof (a 
penthouse, it seemed, built on to the north end of the house). Its walls 

and yellow curtains. The floor was flagged, and strewn with fresh green 
rushes. There were four deep mattresses, each piled with white blankets, 
laid on the floor along one side. Against the opposite wall was a long bench 

with water, some cold, some steaming hot. There were soft green slippers set 


Before long, washed and refreshed, the hobbits were seated at the 
table, two on each side, while at either end sat Goldberry and the Master. 

It was a long and merry meal. Though the hobbits ate, as only famished 

to be clear cold water, yet it went to their hearts like wine and set free 
their voices. The guests became suddenly aware that they were singing 
merrily, as if it was easier and more natural than talking. 


guests were commanded to sit quiet, and were set in chairs, each with a 
footstool to his tired feet. There was a fire in the wide hearth before 

apple-wood. When everything was set in order, all the lights in the room 
were put out, except one lamp and a pair of candles at each end of the 
chimney-shelf. Then Goldberry came and stood before them, holding a candle; 


'Have peace now,' she said, 'until the morning! Heed no nightly noises! 

For nothing passes door and window here save moonlight and starlight and the 

glimmer and a rustle. The sound of her footsteps was like a stream falling 




gently away downhill over cool stones in the quiet of night. 

Tom sat on a while beside them in silence, while each of them tried to 

supper. Sleep gathered on their eyelids. At last Frodo spoke: 

'Did you hear me calling, Master, or was it just chance that brought 


Tom stirred like a man shaken out of a pleasant dream. 'Eh, what?' said 

chance brought me then, if chance you call it. It was no plan of mine, 
though I was waiting for you. We heard news of you, and learned that you 
were wandering. We guessed you'd come ere long down to the water: all paths 

singer; and it's hard for little folk to escape his cunning mazes. But Tom 
had an errand there, that he dared not hinder.' Tom nodded as if sleep was 


I had an errand there: gathering water-lilies, 

the last ere the year's end to keep them from the winter, 
to flower by her pretty feet tilt the snows are melted. 


in a wide pool, deep and clear, far down Withywindle; 


By that pool long ago I found the River-daughter, 


Sweet was her singing then, and her heart was beating! 

He opened his eyes and looked at them with a sudden glint of blue: 


go down deep again along the forest-water, 

Old Man Willow's house this side of spring-time, 

dances down the withy-path to bathe in the water. 


question: the one he most desired to have answered. 'Tell us, Master,' he 
said, 'about the Willow-man. What is he? I have never heard of him before.' 

'No, don't!' said Merry and Pippin together, sitting suddenly upright. 






That is right!' said the old man. 'Now is the time for resting. Some 

morning -light, rest on the pillow ! Heed no nightly noise! Fear no grey 
willow!' And with that he took down the lamp and blew it out, and grasping a 


Their mattresses and pillows were soft as down, and the blankets were 
of white wool. They had hardly laid themselves on the deep beds and drawn 


In the dead night, Frodo lay in a dream without light. Then he saw the 
young moon rising; under its thin light there loomed before him a black wall 
of rock, pierced by a dark arch like a great gate. It seemed to Frodo that 

hills, and that within it was a plain, and in the midst of the plain stood a 
pinnacle of stone, like a vast tower but not made by hands. On its top stood 
the figure of a man. The moon as it rose seemed to hang for a moment above 
his head and glistened in his white hair as the wind stirred it. Up from the 

wolves. Suddenly a shadow, like the shape of great wings, passed across the 
moon. The figure lifted his arms and a light flashed from the staff that he 
wielded. A mighty eagle swept down and bore him away. The voices wailed 



was borne the sound of hoofs, galloping, galloping, galloping from the East. 
'Black Riders!' thought Frodo as he wakened, with the sound of the hoofs 
still echoing in his mind. He wondered if he would ever again have the 

listening; but all was now silent, and at last he turned and fell asleep 
again or wandered into some other unremembered dream. 


dreams and he turned and groaned. Suddenly he woke, or thought he had 


and yet still heard in the darkness the sound that had disturbed his dream: 
tip-tap, squeak : the noise was like branches fretting in the wind, 

there were willow-trees close to the house; and then suddenly he had a 
dreadful feeling that he was not in an ordinary house at all, but inside the 
willow and listening to that horrible dry creaking voice laughing at him 





down again relieved. He seemed to hear the echo of words in his ears: ’Fear 
nothing! Have peace until the morning! Heed no nightly noises!' Then he went 


It was the sound of water that Merry heard falling into his quiet 
sleep: water streaming down gently, and then spreading, spreading 

under the walls, and was rising slowly but surely. 'I shall be drowned!' he 
thought. It will find its way in, and then I shall drown.' He felt that he 
was lying in a soft slimy bog, and springing up he set his fool on the 

down again. He seemed to hear or remember hearing: 'Nothing passes doors or 
windows save moonlight and starlight and the wind off the hill-top.' A 

asleep again. 


content, if logs are contented. 


about the room whistling like a starling. When he heard them stir he clapped 
his hands, and cried: 'Hey! Come merry dol! derry dol! My hearties!' He drew 
back the yellow curtains, and the hobbits saw that these had covered the 



They leapt up refreshed. Frodo ran to the eastern window, and found 
himself looking into a kitchen-garden grey with dew. He had half expected to 
see turf right up to the walls, turf all pocked with hoof-prints. Actually 

beyond them the grey top of the hill loomed up against the sunrise. It was a 
pale morning: in the East, behind long clouds like lines of soiled wool 
stained red at the edges, lay glimmering deeps of yellow. The sky spoke of 

the beans began to glow against the wet green leaves. 

Pippin looked out of the western window, down into a pool of mist. The 

cloud-roof from above. There was a fold or channel where the mist was broken 
into many plumes and billows; the valley of the Withywindle. The stream ran 
down the hill on the left and vanished into the white shadows. Near at hand 




was a flower-garden and a clipped hedge silver -netted, and beyond that grey 


'Good morning, merry friends!' cried Tom, opening the eastern window 
wide. A cool air flowed in; it had a rainy smell. 'Sun won't show her face 
much today. I'm thinking. I have been walking wide, leaping on the hilltops, 

sky above me. I wakened Goldberry singing under window; but nought 


hobbit-folk in the early morning. In the night little folk wake up in the 
darkness, and sleep after light has come! Ring a ding dillo! Wake now, my 

my hearties! If you come soon you'll find breakfast on the table. If you 
come late you'll get grass and rain-water!' 


hobbits came soon, and left the table late and only when it was beginning lo 
look rather empty. Neither Tom nor Goldberry were there. Tom could be heard 
about the house, clattering in the kitchen, and up and down the stairs, and 

mist-clouded valley, and the window was open. Water dripped down from the 
thatched eaves above. Before they had finished breakfast the clouds had 

steadily down. Behind its deep curtain the Forest was completely veiled. 

As they looked out of the window there came falling gently as if it was 
flowing down the rain out of the sky, the clear voice of Goldberry singing 

the song was a rain-song, as sweet as showers on dry hills, that told the 
tale of a river from the spring in the highlands to the Sea far below. The 
hobbits listened with delight; and Frodo was glad in his heart, and blessed 
the kindly weather, because it delayed them from departing. The thought of 



that they would not go further that day. 


up to spill their laden rain on the bare heads of the Downs. Nothing could 
be seen all round the house but falling water. Frodo stood near the open 
door and watched the white chalky path turn into a little river of milk and 





the 


indeed when he sprang over the threshold he seemed quite dry, except for his 
boots. These he took off and put in the chimney-corner. Then he sat in the 


This is Goldberry's washing day,' he said, ’and her autumn-cleaning. 

Too wet for hobbit-folk - let them rest while they are able! It’s a good day 
for long tales, for questions and for answers, so Tom will start the 



speaking to himself, sometimes looking at them suddenly with a bright blue 
eye under his deep brows. Often his voice would turn to song, and he would 
get out of his chair and dance about. He told them tales of bees and 

the evil things and good things, things friendly and things unfriendly, 
cruel things and kind things, and secrets hidden under brambles. 

As they listened, they began to understand the lives of the Forest, 

other things were at home. Moving constantly in and out of his talk was Old 
Man Willow, and Frodo learned now enough to content him, indeed more 


enough, for it was not comfortable lore. Tom’s words laid bare the hearts of 

a hatred of things that go free upon the earth, gnawing, biting, breaking, 
hacking, burning: destroyers and usurpers. It was not called the Old Forest 
without reason, for it was indeed ancient, a survivor of vast forgotten 

fathers of the fathers of trees, remembering times when they were lords. The 
countless years had filled them with pride and rooted wisdom, and with 
malice. But none were more dangerous than the Great Willow: his heart was 

winds, and his song and thought ran through the woods on both sides of the 
river. His grey thirsty spirit drew power out of the earth and spread like 
fine root-threads in the ground, and invisible twig-fingers in the air, till 

to the Downs. 





stream, over bubbling waterfalls, over pebbles and worn rocks, and among 
small flowers in close grass and wet crannies, wandering at last up on to 
the Downs. They heard of the Great Barrows, and the green mounds, and the 

bleating in flocks. Green walls and white walls rose. There were fortresses 
on the heights. Kings of little kingdoms fought together, and the young Sun 
shone like fire on the red metal of their new and greedy swords. There was 

up into the sky. Gold was piled on the biers of dead kings and queens; and 
mounds covered them, and the stone doors were shut; and the grass grew over 
all. Sheep walked for a while biting the grass, but soon the hills were 

stirred in the mounds. Barrow- wights walked in the hollow places with a 
clink of rings on cold fingers, and gold chains in the wind.' Stone rings 
grinned out of the ground like broken teeth in the moonlight. 


Barrow- wights of the Barrow-downs beyond the Forest had been heard. But it 
was not a tale that any hobbit liked to listen to, even by a comfortable 

house had driven from their minds: the house of Tom Bombadil nestled under 
the very shoulder of those dreaded hills. They lost the thread of his tale 
and shifted uneasily, looking aside at one another. 


into strange regions beyond their memory and beyond their waking thought, 
into limes when the world was wider, and the seas flowed straight to the 

starlight, when only the Elf-sires were awake. Then suddenly he slopped, and 
they saw that he nodded as if he was falling asleep. The hobbits sat still 
before him, enchanted; and it seemed as if, under the spell of his words, 

withdrawn, and darkness had come from East and West, and all the sky was 
filled with the light of white stars. 


Frodo could not tell. Ele did not feel either hungry or tired, only filled 
with wonder. The stars shone through the window and the silence of the 









’Eh, what?' said Tom sitting up, and his eyes glinting in the gloom. 

'Don't you know my name yet? That's the only answer. Tell me, who are you, 

what I am. Mark my words, my friends: Tom was here before the river and the 
trees; Tom remembers the first raindrop and the first acorn. He made paths 
before the Big People, and saw the little People arriving. He was here 
before the Kings and the graves and the Barrow- wights. When the Elves passed 

under the stars when it was fearless - before the Dark Lord came from 


A shadow seemed to pass by the window, and the hobbits glanced hastily 
through the panes. When they turned again, Goldberry stood in the door 

draught with her hand; and the light flowed through it, like sunlight 


'The rain has ended,' she said; 'and new waters are running downhill, 


'And let us have food and drink!' cried Tom. 'Long tales are thirsty. 

And long listening's hungry work, morning, noon, and evening!' With that he 
jumped out of his chair, and with a bound took a candle from the 

about the table. Suddenly he hopped through the door and disappeared. 

Quickly he returned, bearing a large and laden tray. Then Tom and 

laughter: so fair was the grace of Goldberry and so merry and odd the 
caperings of Tom. Yet in some fashion they seemed to weave a single dance, 
neither hindering the other, in and out of the room, and round about the 


The boards blazed with candles, white and yellow. Tom bowed to his guests. 
'Supper is ready,' said Goldberry; and now the hobbits saw that she was 
clothed all in silver with a white girdle, and her shoes were like fishes' 

he had green stockings. 









them it seemed at least a week since they had eaten. They did not sing or 
even speak much for a while, and paid close attention to business. But after 
a time their hearts and spirit rose high again, and their voices rang out in 


After they had eaten, Goldberry sang many songs for them, songs that 

silences they saw in their minds pools and waters wider than any they had 
known, and looking into them they saw the sky below them and the stars like 
jewels in the depths. Then once more she wished them each good night and 





He appeared already to know much about them and all their families, and 
indeed to know much of all the history and doings of the Shire down from 
days hardly remembered among the hobbits themselves. It no longer surprised 

Farmer Maggot, whom he seemed to regard as a person of more importance 


they had imagined. 'There's earth under his old feet, and clay on his 
fingers; wisdom in his bones, and both his eyes are open,' said Tom. It was 

fashion, news had reached him from Gildor concerning the flight of Frodo. 

Indeed so much did Tom know, and so cunning was his questioning, that 
Frodo found himself telling him more about Bilbo and his own hopes and fears 

and there was a glint in his eyes when he heard of the Riders. 

'Show me the precious Ring!' he said suddenly in the midst of the 
story: and Frodo, to his own astonishment, drew out the chain from his 


It seemed to grow larger as it lay for a moment on his big 

second the hobbits had a vision, both comical and alarming, of his bright 
blue eye gleaming through a circle of gold. Then Tom put the Ring round the 
end of his little finger and held it up to the candlelight. For a moment the 
hobbits noticed nothing strange about this. Then they gasped. There was no 






Tom laughed again, and then he spun the Ring in the air - and it 

it back to him with a smile. 


lent a trinket to a juggler). It was the same Ring, or looked the same and 
weighed the same: for that Ring had always seemed to Frodo to weigh 
strangely heavy in the hand. But something prompted him to make sure. He 



Gandalf thought so perilously important. He waited for an opportunity, when 
the talk was going again, and Tom was telling an absurd story about badgers 


Merry turned towards him to say something and gave a start, and checked 
an exclamation. Frodo was delighted (in a way): it was his own ring all 
right, for Merry was staring blankly at his chair, and obviously could not 




his shining eyes. 'Hey! Come Frodo, there! Where be you a-going? Old Tom 
Bombadil's not as blind as that yet. Take off your golden ring! Your hand's 

We 


right road, and keep your feet from wandering.' 


and sat down again. Tom now told them that he reckoned the Sun would shine 
tomorrow, and it would be a glad morning, and setting out would be hopeful. 
But they would do well to start early; for weather in that country was a 

sometimes quicker than he could change his jacket. 'I am no weather-master,' 
he said; 'nor is aught that goes on two legs.' 


over the western and lower slopes of the Downs: they might hope in that way 
to strike the East Road in a day's journey, and avoid the Barrows. He told 
them not to be afraid - but to mind their own business. 






cold Wights or prying in their houses, unless you be strong folk with hearts 
that never falter!' He said this more than once; and he advised them to pass 
barrows by on the west-side, if they chanced to stray near one. Then he 

or difficulty the next day. 



By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow, 





When they had sung this altogether after him, he clapped them each on 
the shoulder with a laugh, and taking candles led them back to their 









That night they heard no noises. But either in his dreams or out of 
them, he could not tell which, Frodo heard a sweet singing running in his 
mind; a song that seemed to come like a pale light behind a grey 

until at last it was rolled back, and a far green country opened before him 


The vision melted into waking; and there was Tom whistling like a 
tree-full of birds; and the sun was already slanting down the hill and 


After breakfast, which they again ate alone, they made ready to say 
farewell, as nearly heavy of heart as was possible on such a morning: cool, 
bright, and clean under a washed autumn sky of thin blue. The air came fresh 

moving restlessly. Tom came out of the house and waved his hat and danced 
upon the doorstep, bidding the hobbits to get up and be off and go with good 


They rode off along a path that wound away from behind the house, and 

sheltered. They had just dismounted to lead their ponies up the last steep 
slope, when suddenly Frodo stopped. 


never said farewell to her, nor seen her since the evening!' He was so 
distressed that he turned back; but at that moment a clear call came 
rippling down. There on the hill-brow she stood beckoning to them: her hair 

like the glint of water on dewy grass flashed from under her feet as she 


They hastened up the last slope, and stood breathless beside her. They 
bowed, but with a wave of her arm she bade them look round; and they looked 

far-seen as it had been veiled and misty when they stood upon the knoll in 
the Forest, which could now be seen rising pale and green out of the dark 
trees in the West. In that direction the land rose in wooded ridges, green, 





Brandywine. To the South, over the line of the Withywindle, there was a 
distant glint like pale glass where the Brandywine River made a great loop 
in the lowlands and flowed away out of the knowledge of the hobbits. 

swellings of grey and green and pale earth -colours, until it faded into a 
featureless and shadowy distance. Eastward the Barrow-downs rose, ridge 
behind ridge into the morning, and vanished out of eyesight into a guess: it 

the hem of the sky, but it spoke to them, out of memory and old tales, of 


They took a deep draught of the air, and felt that a skip and a few 
stout strides would bear them wherever they wished. It seemed fainthearted 
to go jogging aside over the crumpled skirts of the downs towards the Road, 

the hills straight towards the Mountains. 

Goldberry spoke to them and recalled their eyes and thoughts. ’Speed 

in the left eye and a blessing on your footsteps! Make haste while the Sun 
shines!' And to Frodo she said: 'Farewell, Elf-friend, it was a merry 


But Frodo found no words to answer. He bowed low, and mounted his pony, 

hill. Tom Bombadil's house and the valley, and the Forest were lost to view. 
The air grew warmer between the green walls of hillside and hillside, and 
the scent of turf rose strong and sweet as they breathed. Turning back, when 
they reached the bottom of the green hollow, they saw Goldberry, now small 

watching them, and her hands were stretched out towards them. As they looked 
she gave a clear call, and lifting up her hand she turned and vanished 


Their way wound along the floor of the hollow, and round the green feet 

shoulder of further hills, and down their long limbs, and up their smooth 
sides again, up on to new hill-tops and down into new valleys. There was no 
tree nor any visible water: it was a country of grass and short springy 





and high lonely cries of strange birds. As they journeyed the sun mounted, 
and grew hot. Each time they climbed a ridge the breeze seemed to have grown 
less. When they caught a glimpse of the country westward the distant Forest 
seemed to be smoking, as if the fallen rain was steaming up again from leaf 

above which the upper sky was like a blue cap, hot and heavy. 

About mid-day they came to a hill whose top was wide and flattened, 

stirring, and the sky seemed near their heads. They rode across and looked 
northwards. Then their hearts rose, for it seemed plain that they had come 
further already than they had expected. Certainly the distances had now all 

coming to an end. A long valley lay below them winding away northwards, 
until it came to an opening between two steep shoulders. Beyond, there 
seemed to be no more hills. Due north they faintly glimpsed a long dark 


All along it for many leagues east of the Bridge there are trees growing. 

Some say they were planted in the old days.' 


have done this morning, we shall have left the Downs before the Sun sets and 
be jogging on in search of a camping place.' But even as he spoke he turned 
his glance eastwards, and he saw that on that side the hills were higher and 

and on some were standing stones, pointing upwards like jagged teeth out of 


That view was somehow disquieting; so they turned from the sight and 
went down into the hollow circle. In the midst of it there stood a single 

shadow. It was shapeless and yet significant: like a landmark, or a guarding 
finger, or more like a warning. But they were now hungry, and the sun was 
still at the fearless noon; so they set their backs against the east side of 
the stone. It was cool, as if the sun had had no power to warm it; but at 

good a noon-meal under the open sky as anyone could wish; for the food came 
from 'down under Hill'. Tom had provided them with plenty for the comfort of 


Riding over the hills, and eating their fill, the warm sun and the 




scent of turf, lying a little too long, stretching out their legs and 
looking at the sky above their noses: these things are, perhaps, enough to 

uncomfortably from a sleep they had never meant to take. The standing stone 
was cold, and it cast a long pale shadow that stretched eastward over them. 
The sun, a pale and watery yellow, was gleaming through the mist just above 

beyond the wall the fog was thick, cold and white. The air was silent, heavy 
and chill. Their ponies were standing crowded together with their heads 


The hobbits sprang to their feet in alarm, and ran to the western rim. 


in dismay towards the setting sun, it sank before their eyes into a white 
sea, and a cold grey shadow sprang up in the East behind. The fog rolled up 
to the walls and rose above them, and as it mounted it bent over their heads 

pillar was the standing stone. 

They felt as if a trap was closing about them; but they did not quite 

of the Road ahead, and they still knew in which direction it lay. In any 
case, they now had so great a dislike for that hollow place about the stone 
that no thought of remaining there was in their minds. They packed up as 


Soon they were leading their ponies in single file over the rim and 

went down the mist became colder and damper, and their hair hung lank and 
dripping on their foreheads. When they reached the bottom it was so cold 
that they halted and got out cloaks and hoods, which soon became bedewed 

feeling their way by the rise and fall of the ground. They were steering, as 
well as they could guess, for the gate-like opening at the far northward end 
of the long valley which they had seen in the morning. Once they were 

and they were bound in the end to strike the Road. Their thoughts did not go 
beyond that, except for a vague hope that perhaps away beyond the Downs 


Their going was very slow. To prevent their getting separated and 




wandering in different directions they went in file, with Frodo leading. Sam 



to stretch on endlessly. Suddenly Frodo saw a hopeful sign. On either side 
ahead a darkness began to loom through the mist; and he guessed that they 
were at last approaching the gap in the hills, the north-gate of the 


'Come on! Follow me!' he called back over his shoulder, and he hurried 
forward. But his hope soon changed to bewilderment and alarm. The dark 
patches grew darker, but they shrank; and suddenly he saw, towering ominous 

headless door, two huge standing stones. He could not remember having seen 
any sign of these in the valley, when he looked out from the hill in the 
morning. He had passed between them almost before he was aware: and even 



and he fell off. When he looked back he found that he was alone: the others 
had not followed him. 'Sam!' he called. 'Pippin! Merry! Come along! Why 


There was no answer. Fear took him, and he ran back past the stones 

and vanished. From some way off, or so it seemed, he thought he heard a cry: 
'Hoy! Frodo! Hoy!' It was away eastward, on his left as he stood under the 
great stones, staring and straining into the gloom. He plunged off in the 


As he struggled on he called again, and kept on calling more and more 
frantically; but he heard no answer for some time, and then it seemed faint 
and far ahead and high above him. 'Frodo! Hoy!' came the thin voices out of 

ending with a last help! that trailed off into a long wail suddenly cut 
short. He stumbled forward with all the speed he could towards the cries; 
but the light was now gone, and clinging night had closed about him, so that 

climbing up and up. 


at last came to the top of a ridge or hill. He was weary, sweating and yet 





'Where are you?' he cried out miserably. 

There was no reply. He stood listening. He was suddenly aware that it 

wind. A change was coming in the weather. The mist was flowing past him 


in shreds and tatters. His breath was smoking, and the darkness was less 
near and thick. He looked up and saw with surprise that faint stars were 

began to hiss over the grass. 


it; and even as he went forward the mist was rolled up and thrust aside, and 
the starry sky was unveiled. A glance showed him that he was now facing 
southwards and was on a round hill-top, which he must have climbed from the 

loomed against the westward stars a dark black shape. A great barrow stood 


’Where are you?' he cried again, both angry and afraid. 

'Here!' said a voice, deep and cold, that seemed to come out of the 


'No!' said Frodo; but he did not run away. His knees gave, and he fell 



up, in time to see a tall dark figure like a shadow against the stars. It 
leaned over him. He thought there were two eyes, very cold though lit with a 
pale light that seemed to come from some remote distance. Then a grip 

he remembered no more. 


except a sense of dread. Then suddenly he knew that he was imprisoned, 
caught hopelessly; he was in a barrow. A Barrow-wight had taken him, and he 
was probably already under the dreadful spells of the Barrow- wights about 

flat on his back upon a cold stone with his hands on his breast. 

But though his fear was so great that it seemed to be part of the very 
darkness that was round him, he found himself as he lay thinking about Bilbo 

Shire and talking about roads and adventures. There is a seed of courage 




hidden (often deeply, it is true) in the heart of the fattest and most timid 
hobbit, wailing for some final and desperate danger to make it grow. Frodo 


Bilbo (and Gandalf) had thought him the best hobbit in the Shire. He thought 
he had come to the end of his adventure, and a terrible end, but the thought 
hardened him. He found himself stiffening, as if for a final spring; he no 


As he lay there, thinking and getting a hold of himself, he noticed all 
at once that the darkness was slowly giving way: a pale greenish light was 

in, for the light seemed to be coming out of himself, and from the floor 
beside him, and had not yet reached the roof or wall. He turned, and there 
in the cold glow he saw lying beside him Sam, Pippin, and Merry. They were 

white. About them lay many treasures, of gold maybe, though in that light 
they looked cold and unlovely. On their heads were circlets, gold chains 
were about their waists, and on their fingers were many rings. Swords lay by 

lay one long naked sword. 


seemed far away and immeasurably dreary, sometimes high in the air and thin, 
sometimes like a low moan from the ground. Out of the formless stream of sad 
but horrible sounds, strings of words would now and again shape themselves: 

against the morning of which it was bereaved, and the cold was cursing the 
warmth for which it hungered. Frodo was chilled to the marrow. After a while 
the song became clearer, and with dread in his heart he perceived that it 




and cold be sleep under stone: 



never, till the Sun fails and the Moon is dead. 



till the dark lord lifts his hand 


He heard behind his head a creaking and scraping sound. Raising himself 




on one arm he looked, and saw now in the pale light that they were in a kind 

was groping, walking on its fingers towards Sam, who was lying nearest, and 
towards the hilt of the sword that lay upon him. 


incantation. Then a wild thought of escape came to him. He wondered if he 
put on the Ring, whether the Barrow-wight would miss him, and he might find 
some way out. He thought of himself running free over the grass, grieving 

admit that there had been nothing else he could do. 

But the courage that had been awakened in him was now too strong: he 

and then fought with himself again; and as he did so the arm crept nearer. 
Suddenly resolve hardened in him, and he seized a short sword that lay 
beside him, and kneeling he stooped low over the bodies of his companions. 

the hand broke off; but at the same moment the sword splintered up to the 
hilt. There was a shriek and the light vanished. In the dark there was a 


Frodo fell forward over Merry, and Merry's face felt cold. All at once 
back into his mind, from which it had disappeared with the first coming of 

singing. He remembered the rhyme that Tom had taught them. In a small 
desperate voice he began: Ho! Tom Bombadil! and with that name his voice 

echoed as if to drum and trumpet. 



By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow, 



Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us! 


beating. After a long slow moment he heard plain, but far away, as if it was 
coming down through the ground or through thick walls, an answering voice 




Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow. 

None has ever caught him yet, for Tom, he is the master: 






There was a loud rumbling sound, as of stones rolling and falling, and 
suddenly light streamed in, real light, the plain light of day. A low 

and there was Tom's head (hat, feather, and all) framed against the light of 
the sun rising red behind him. The light fell upon the floor, and upon the 
faces of the three hobbits lying beside Frodo. They did not stir, but the 



Tom stooped, removed his hat, and came into the dark chamber, singing: 

Get out, you old Wight! Vanish in the sunlight! 



Out into the barren lands far beyond the mountains! 



Lost and forgotten be, darker than the darkness, 



At these words there was a cry and part of the inner end of the chamber 
fell in with a crash. Then there was a long trailing shriek, fading away 


’Come, friend Frodo!' said Tom. 'Let us get out on to clean grass! You 


Together they carried out Merry, Pippin, and Sam. As Frodo left the 
barrow for the last time he thought he saw a severed hand wriggling still, 
like a wounded spider, in a heap of fallen earth. Tom went back in again, 



bearing in his arms a great load of treasure: things of gold, silver, 
copper, and bronze; many beads and chains and jewelled ornaments. He 


the green barrow and laid them all on top in the sunshine. 


looked down upon the three hobbits, that had been laid on their backs upon 
the grass at the west side of the mound. Raising his right hand he said in a 


Wake now my merry tads! Wake and hear me calling! 



Dark door is standing wide; dead hand is broken. 






To Frodo’s great joy the hobbits stirred, stretched their arms, rubbed 
their eyes, and then suddenly sprang up. They looked about in amazement, 
first at Frodo, and then at Tom standing large as life on the barrow-top 

belted with pale gold, and jingling with trinkets. 

'What in the name of wonder?' began Merry, feeling the golden circlet 

face, and he closed his eyes. 'Of course, I remember!' he said. 'The men of 
Carn Dym came on us at night, and we were worsted. Ah! the spear in my 


'What am I saying? I have been dreaming. Where did you get to, Frodo?' 

'I thought that I was lost,' said Frodo; 'but I don't want to speak of 
it. Let us think of what we are to do now! Let us go on!' 


his circlet, belt, and rings on the grass, and looked round helplessly, as 
if he expected to find his cloak, jacket, and breeches, and other 


'You won't find your clothes again,' said Tom, bounding down from the 
mound, and laughing as he danced round them in the sunlight. One would have 

horror faded out of their hearts as they looked at him, and saw the merry 


'What do you mean?' asked Pippin, looking at him, half puzzled and half 


But Tom shook his head, saying: 'You've found yourselves again, out of 
the deep water. Clothes are but little loss, if you escape from drowning. Be 
glad, my merry friends, and let the warm sunlight heal now heart and limb! 


He sprang away down hill, whistling and calling. Looking down after him 
Frodo saw him running away southwards along the green hollow between 




Hey! now! Come hoy now! Whither do you wander? 



Sharp-ears, Wise-nose, Swish-tail and Bumpkin, 






So he sang, running fast, tossing up his hat and catching it, until he 
was hidden by a fold of the ground: but for some time his hey now! hoy now! 
came floating back down the wind, which had shifted round towards the south. 


on the grass, as he told them. Then they lay basking in the sun with the 
delight of those that have been wafted suddenly from bitter winter to a 
friendly clime, or of people that, after being long ill and bedridden, wake 



By the time that Tom returned they were feeling strong (and hungry). He 
reappeared, hat first, over the brow of the hill, and behind him came in an 
obedient line six ponies: their own five and one more. The last was plainly 

own ponies. Merry, to whom the others belonged, had not, in fact, given them 
any such names, but they answered to the new names that Tom had given 


for the rest of their lives. Tom called them one by one and they climbed 


'Here are your ponies, now!' he said. 'They've more sense (in some 
ways) than you wandering hobbits have - more sense in their noses. For they 
sniff danger ahead which you walk right into; and if they run to save 

though their hearts are faithful, to face fear of Barrow- wights is not what 
they were made for. See, here they come again, bringing all their burdens!' 

Merry, Sam, and Pippin now clothed themselves in spare garments from 

some of the thicker and warmer things that they had brought against the 


'Where does that other old animal, that Fatty Lumpkin, come from?' 


'He's mine,' said Tom. 'My four-legged friend; though I seldom ride 
him, and he wanders often far, free upon the hillsides. When your ponies 

night, and quickly ran to meet him. I thought he'd look for them and with 
his words of wisdom take all their fear away. But now, my jolly Lumpkin, old 
Tom's going to ride. Hey! he's coming with you, just to set you on the road; 





when you're on your own legs trying to trot beside them.' 

The hobbits were delighted to hear this, and thanked Tom many times; 

would not feel happy till he had seen them safe over the borders of his 
land. Tve got things to do,' he said: 'my making and my singing, my 
talking and my walking, and my watching of the country. Tom can't be always 

Goldberry is waiting.' 


and the hobbits turned their minds to food. Their last meal had been lunch 
beside the standing stone the day before. They breakfasted now off the 
remainder of Tom's provisions, meant for their supper, with additions that 

the circumstances), but they felt much better for it. While they were eating 
Tom went up to the mound, and looked through the treasures. Most of these he 
made into a pile that glistened and sparkled on the grass. He bade them lie 

creatures'; for so the spell of the mound should be broken and scattered and 
no Wight ever come back to it. He chose for himself from the pile a brooch 
set with blue stones, many-shaded like flax-flowers or the wings of blue 

head, and saying at last: 


ago wore this on her shoulder. Goldberry shall wear it now, and we will not 


For each of the hobbits he chose a dagger, long, leaf-shaped, and keen, 
of marvellous workmanship, damasked with serpent-forms in red and gold. 


gleamed as he drew them from their black sheaths, wrought of some strange 

virtue in these sheaths or because of the spell that lay on the mound, the 
blades seemed untouched by time, unrusted, sharp, glittering in the sun. 

'Old knives are long enough as swords for hobbit-people,' he said. 


far away into dark and danger.' Then he told them that these blades were 
forged many long years ago by Men of Westernesse: they were foes of the 





Lord, but they were overcome by the evil king of Carn Dym in the Land of 



sons of forgotten kings walking in loneliness, guarding from evil things 


The hobbits did not understand his words, but as he spoke they had a 
vision as it were of a great expanse of years behind them, like a vast 
shadowy plain over which there strode shapes of Men, tall and grim with 

faded, and they were back in the sunlit world. It was time to start again. 

They made ready, packing their bags and lading their ponies. Their new 
weapons they hung on their leather belts under their jackets, feeling them 

before occurred to any of them as one of the adventures in which their 


At last they set off. They led their ponies down the hill; and then 
mounting they trotted quickly along the valley. They looked back and saw the 
top of the old mound on the hill, and from it the sunlight on the gold went 




stones standing like a gate, and before long they came to the northern gap 
and rode swiftly through, and the land fell away before them. It was a merry 
journey with Tom Bombadil trotting gaily beside them, or before them, on 



most of the time, but it was chiefly nonsense, or else perhaps a strange 
language unknown to the hobbits, an ancient language whose words were 




They went forward steadily, but they soon saw that the Road was further 
away than they had imagined. Even without a fog, their sleep at mid-day 

before. The dark line they had seen was not a line of trees but a line of 
bushes growing on the edge of a deep dike with a steep wall on the further 
side. Tom said that it had once been the boundary of a kingdom, but a very 





say much. 


and then Tom turned due north, for they had been bearing somewhat to the 
west. The land was now open and fairly level, and they quickened their pace, 
but the sun was already sinking low when at last they saw a line of tall 

unexpected adventures. They galloped their ponies over the last furlongs, 
and halted under the long shadows of the trees. They were on the top of a 

below 


their right it fell quickly down into a wide hollow. It was rutted and bore 
many signs of the recent heavy rain; there were pools and pot-holes full of 
water. They rode down the bank and looked up and down. There was nothing 



haven’t lost more than two days by my short cut through the Forest! But 
perhaps the delay will prove useful - it may have put them off our trail.' 

The others looked at him. The shadow of the fear of the Black Riders 

had thought chiefly of getting back to the Road; only now when it lay 
beneath their feet did they remember the danger which pursued them, and was 
more than likely to be lying in wait for them upon the Road itself. They 



'Do you think,' asked Pippin hesitatingly, 'do you think we may be 


'No, I hope not tonight,' answered Tom Bombadil; 'nor perhaps the next 
day. But do not trust my guess; for I cannot tell for certain. Out east my 

his country.' 


he would know how to deal with Black Riders, if anyone did. They would 


now be going forward into lands wholly strange to them, and beyond all but 
the most vague and distant legends of the Shire, and in the gathering 





them. They stood silent, reluctant to make the final parting, and only 
slowly became aware that Tom was wishing them farewell, and telling them to 
have good heart and to ride on till dark without halting. 


own luck must go with you and guide you): four miles along the Road you'll 
come upon a village, Bree under Bree-hill, with doors looking westward. 

Butterbur is the worthy keeper. There you can stay the night, and afterwards 
the morning will speed you upon your way. Be bold, but wary! Keep up your 


They begged him to come at least as far as the inn and drink once more 
with them; but he laughed and refused, saying: 



Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting! 

Then he turned, tossed up his hat, leaped on Lumpkin's back, and rode 


The hobbits climbed up and watched him until he was out of sight. 


caution and no mistake. I reckon we may go a good deal further and see 
naught better, nor queerer. But I won't deny I'll be glad to see this 
Prancing Pony he spoke of. I hope it'll be like The Green Dragon away back 


'There are hobbits in Bree,' said Merry, 'as well as Big Folk. I 


My people ride out there now and again.' 

'It may be all we could wish,' said Frodo; 'but it is outside the Shire 

of you - that the name of Baggins must NOT be mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill, 


They now mounted their ponies and rode off silently into the evening. 
Darkness came down quickly, as they plodded slowly downhill and up again, 
until at last they saw lights twinkling some distance ahead. 


stars; and under its western flank nestled a large village. Towards it they 
now hurried desiring only to find a fire, and a door between them and the 











Bree was the chief village of the Bree-land, a small inhabited region, 
like an island in the empty lands round about. Besides Bree itself, there 
was Staddle on the other side of the hill, Combe in a deep valley a little 

Bree-hill and the villages was a small country of fields and tamed woodland 


The Men of Bree were brown-haired, broad, and rather short, cheerful 
and independent: they belonged to nobody but themselves; but they were more 
friendly and familiar with Hobbits, Dwarves, Elves, and other inhabitants of 

their own tales they were the original inhabitants and were the descendants 
of the first Men that ever wandered into the West of the middle-world. Few 
had survived the turmoils of the Elder Days; but when the Kings returned 

were still there now, when the memory of the old Kings had faded into the 


In those days no other Men had settled dwellings so far west, or within 
a hundred leagues of the Shire. But in the wild lands beyond Bree there were 
mysterious wanderers. The Bree-folk called them Rangers, and knew nothing 



believed to have strange powers of sight and hearing, and to understand the 
languages of beasts and birds. They roamed at will southwards, and eastwards 
even as far as the Misty Mountains; but they were now few and rarely seen. 

tales which were eagerly listened to; but the Bree-folk did not make friends 


There were also many families of hobbits in the Bree-land and they 
claimed to be the oldest settlement of Hobbits in the world, one that was 

They lived mostly in Staddle though there were some in Bree itself, 
especially on the higher slopes of the hill, above the houses of the Men. 




The Big Folk and the Little Folk (as they called one another) were on 

rightly regarding themselves as necessary parts of the Bree-folk. Nowhere 
else in the world was this peculiar (but excellent) arrangement to be found. 

The Bree-folk, Big and Little, did not themselves travel much; and the 

Hobbits of Bree went as far as Buckland, or the Eastfarthing; but though 
their link land was not much further than a day's riding east of the 
Brandywine Bridge, the Hobbits of the Shire now seldom visited it. An 

night or two, but even that was becoming less and less usual. The 
Shire-hobbits referred to those of Bree, and to any others that lived beyond 

considering them dull and uncouth. There were probably many more 


scattered about in the West of the World in those days than the people of 
the Shire imagined. Some, doubtless, were no better than tramps, ready to 

Bree-land, at any rate, the hobbits were decent and prosperous, and no more 
rustic than most of their distant relatives Inside. It was not yet forgotten 
that there had been a time when there was much coming and going between 


Shire and Bree. There was Bree-blood in the Brandybucks by all accounts. 


mostly above the Road, nestling on the hillside with windows looking west. 
On that side, running in more than half a circle from the hill and back to 

the Road crossed by a causeway; but where it pierced the hedge it was barred 
by a great gate. There was another gate in the southern comer where the Road 
ran out of the village. The gates were closed at nightfall; but just inside 


Down on the Road, where it swept to the right to go round the foot of 
the hill, there was a large inn. It had been built long ago when the traffic 
on the roads had been far greater. For Bree stood at an old meeting of ways; 

western end of the village, and in former days Men and other folk of various 
sorts had travelled much on it. Strange as News from Bree was still a saying 




in the Eastfarthing, descending from those days, when news from North, 

to go more often to hear it. But the Northern Lands had long been desolate, 
and the North Road was now seldom used: it was grass-grown, and the 


The Inn of Bree was still there, however, and the innkeeper was an 
important person. His house was a meeting place for the idle, talkative, and 

and a resort of Rangers and other wanderers, and for such travellers (mostly 
dwarves) as still journeyed on the East Road, to and from the Mountains. 

It was dark, and white stars were shining, when Frodo and his 

They came to the West-gate and found it shut, but at the door of the lodge 
beyond it, there was a man sitting. He jumped up and fetched a lantern and 


’What do you want, and where do you come from?' he asked gruffly. 

'We are making for the inn here,' answered Frodo. 'We are journeying 


'Hobbits ! Four hobbits ! And what's more, out of the Shire by their 
talk,' said the gatekeeper, softly as if speaking to himself. He stared at 



'We don't often see Shire-folk riding on the Road at night,' he went 
on, as they halted a moment by his door. 'You'll pardon my wondering what 
business takes you away east of Bree! What may your names be, might I ask?' 


place to discuss them,' said Frodo, not liking the look of the man or the 


'Your business is your own, no doubt,' said the man; 'but it's my 


'We are hobbits from Buckland, and we have a fancy to travel and to 
stay at the inn here,' put in Merry. 'I am Mr. Brandybuck. Is that enough 
for you? The Bree-folk used to be fair-spoken to travellers, or so I had 



find maybe that more folk than old Harry at the gate will be asking you 
questions. There's queer folk about. If you go on to The Pony, you'll find 






He wished them good night, and they said no more; but Frodo could see 
in the lantern-light that the man was still eyeing them curiously. He was 

wondered why the man was so suspicious, and whether any one had been 


for news of a party of hobbits. Could it have been Gandalf? He might have 
arrived, while they were delayed in the Forest and the Downs. But there was 



his house. As soon as his back was turned, a dark figure climbed quickly in 
over the gate and melted into the shadows of the village street. 


and drew up outside the inn. The houses looked large and strange to them. 
Sam stared up at the inn with its three storeys and many windows, and felt 
his heart sink. He had imagined himself meeting giants taller than trees, 

of his journey; but at the moment he was finding his first sight of Men and 
their tall houses quite enough, indeed too much for the dark end of a tiring 
day. He pictured black horses standing all saddled in the shadows of the 


'We surely aren't going to stay here for the night, are we, sir?' he 
exclaimed. 'If there are hobbit-folk in these pans, why don't we look for 



I expect it's homelike enough inside.' 



It had a front on the Road, and two wings running back on land partly cut 
out of the lower slopes of the hill, so that at the rear the second-floor 
windows were level with the ground. There was a wide arch leading to a 

large doorway reached by a few broad steps. The door was open and light 
streamed out of it. Above the arch there was a lamp, and beneath it swung a 
large signboard: a fat white pony reared up on its hind legs. Over the door 



of the lower windows showed lights behind thick curtains. 




As they hesitated outside in the gloom, someone began singing a merry 

listened to this encouraging sound for a moment and then got off their 
ponies. The song ended and there was a burst of laughter and clapping. 

They led their ponies under the arch, and leaving them standing in the 

short fat man with a bald head and a red face. He had a white apron on, and 
was bustling out of one door and in through another, carrying a tray laden 




'Half a minute, if you please!' shouted the man over his shoulder, and 
vanished into a babel of voices and a cloud of smoke. In a moment he was out 


'Good evening, little master!' he said, bending down. 'What may you be 


'Beds for four, and stabling for five ponies, if that can be managed. 



'That's right! Barliman is my name. Barliman Butterbur at your service! 
You're from the Shire, eh?' he said, and then suddenly he clapped his hand 


'Now what does that remind me of? Might I ask your names, sir?' 

'Mr. Took and Mr. Brandybuck,' said Frodo; 'and this is Sam Gamgee. My 


'There now!' said Mr. Butterbur, snapping his fingers. 'It's gone 

but I'll see what I can do for you. We don't often get a party out of the 
Shire nowadays, and I should be sorry not to make you welcome. But there is 
such a crowd already in the house tonight as there hasn't been for long 


'Hi! Nob!' he shouted. 'Where are you, you woolly -footed slow-coach? 


'Coming, sir! Coming!' A cheery-looking hobbit bobbed out of a door, 

interest. 


Double sharp! I haven't got six legs, nor six eyes neither! Tell Bob there's 
five ponies that have to be stabled. He must find room somehow.' Nob trotted 






'Well, now, what was I going to say?' said Mr. Butterbur, tapping his 
forehead. 'One thing drives out another, so to speak. I'm that busy tonight, 



South last night - and that was strange enough to begin with. Then there's a 
travelling company of dwarves going West come in this evening. And now 
there's you. If you weren't hobbits, I doubt if we could house you. But 

hobbits, when this place was built. On the ground floor as they usually 
prefer; round windows and all as they like it. I hope you'll be comfortable. 
You'll be wanting supper, I don't doubt. As soon as may be. This way now!' 


nice little parlour!' he said. 'I hope it will suit. Excuse me now. I'm that 
busy. No time for talking. I must be trotting. It's hard work for two legs, 
but I don't get thinner. I'll look in again later. If you want anything, 


Off he went at last, and left them feeling rather breathless. He seemed 
capable of an endless stream of talk, however busy he might be. They found 
themselves in a small and cosy room. There was a bit of bright fire burning 

There was a round table, already spread with a white cloth, and on it was a 
large hand-bell. But Nob, the hobbit servant, came bustling in long before 
they thought of ringing. He brought candles and a tray full of plates. 


I show you the bedrooms, while your supper is got ready?' 

They were washed and in the middle of good deep mugs of beer when Mr. 

was hot soup, cold meats, a blackberry tart, new loaves, slabs of butter, 
and half a ripe cheese: good plain food, as good as the Shire could show, 
and homelike enough to dispel the last of Sam's misgivings (already much 


The landlord hovered round for a link, and then prepared to leave them. 

'I don't know whether you would care to join the company, when you have 

beds. Still the company would be very pleased to welcome you, if you had a 
mind. We don't get Outsiders - travellers from the Shire, I should say, 




begging your pardon - often; and we like to hear a bit of news, or any story 

anything!' 


(about three quarters of an hour's steady going, not hindered by unnecessary 
talk) that Frodo, Pippin, and Sam decided to join the company. Merry said it 
would be too stuffy. 'I shall sit here quietly by the fire for a bit, and 

forget that you are supposed to be escaping in secret, and are still on the 
high-road and not very far from the Shire!' 


forget that it is safer indoors!' 


large and mixed, as Frodo discovered, when his eyes got used to the light. 

This came chiefly from a blazing log-fire, for the three lamps hanging from 
the beams were dim, and half veiled in smoke. Barliman Butterbur was 

strange-looking men. On the benches were various folk: men of Bree, a 
collection of local hobbits (sitting chattering together), a few more 

and comers. 


from the Bree-landers. The strangers, especially those that had come up the 
Greenway, stared at them curiously. The landlord introduced the newcomers to 
the Bree-folk, so quickly that, though they caught many names, they were 

rather botanical (and to the Shire-folk rather odd) names, like Rushlight, 
Goatleaf, Heathertoes, Appledore, Thistlewool and Ferny (not to mention 
Butterbur). Some of the hobbits had similar names. The Mug worts, for 

Banks, Brockhouse, Longholes, Sandheaver, and Tunnelly, many of which 


used in the Shire. There were several Underhills from Saddle, and as they 
could not imagine sharing a name without being related, they took Frodo to 


The Bree-hobbits were, in fact, friendly and inquisitive, and Frodo 





given. He gave out that he was interested in history and geography (at which 
there was much wagging of heads, although neither of these words were much 
used in the Bree-dialect). He said he was thinking of writing a book (at 

collect information about hobbits living outside the Shire, especially in 


At this a chorus of voices broke out. If Frodo had really wanted to 
write a book, and had had many ears, he would have learned enough for 
several chapters in a few minutes. And if that was not enough, he was given 

go for further information. But after a time, as Frodo did not show any sign 
of writing a book on the spot, the hobbits returned to their questions about 
doings in the Shire. Frodo did not prove very communicative, and he soon 


The Men and Dwarves were mostly talking of distant events and telling 
flews of a kind that was becoming only too familiar. There was trouble away 
in the South, and it seemed that the Men who had come up the Greenway 



Bree-folk were sympathetic, but plainly not very ready to take a large 
number of strangers into their little land. One of the travellers, a 

would be coming north in the near future. 'If room isn't found for them, 
they'll find it for themselves. They've a right to live, same as other 
folk,' he said loudly. The local inhabitants did not look pleased at the 


The hobbits did not pay much attention to all this, and it did not at 

in hobbit-holes. They were more interested in Sam and Pippin, who were now 
feeling quite at home, and were chatting gaily about events in the Shire. 
Pippin roused a good deal of laughter with an account of the collapse of the 

fattest hobbit in the Westfarthing, had been buried in chalk, and came out 
like a floured dumpling. But there were several questions asked that made 
Frodo a little uneasy. One of the Bree-landers, who seemed to have been in 

they were related to. 





sitting in the shadows near the wall, was also listening intently to the 
hobbit-talk. He had a tall tankard in front of him, and was smoking a 
long-stemmed pipe curiously carved. His legs were stretched out before him, 

wear and were now caked with mud. A travel -stained cloak of heavy dark- 


cloth was drawn close about him, and in spite of the heat of the room he 
wore a hood that overshadowed his face; but the gleam of his eyes could be 


’Who is that?' Frodo asked, when he got a chance to whisper to Mr. 


'Him?' said the landlord in an answering whisper, cocking an eye 
without turning his head. 'I don't rightly know. He is one of the wandering 

tale when he has the mind. He disappears for a month, or a year, and then he 
pops up again. He was in and out pretty often last spring; but I haven't 
seen him about lately. What his right name is I've never heard: but he's 

though he don't tell nobody what cause he has to hurry. But there's no 
accounting for East and West, as we say in Bree, meaning the Rangers and the 
Shire-folk, begging your pardon. Funny you should ask about him.' But at 

last remark remained unexplained. 


guessed all that had been said. Presently, with a wave of his hand and a 
nod, he invited Frodo to come over and sit by him. As Frodo drew near be 
threw back his hood, showing a shaggy head of dark hair necked with grey, 


'I am called Strider,' he said in a low voice. 'I am very pleased to 
meet you. Master - Underhill, if old Butterbur got your name right.' 


stare of those keen eyes. 


your young friends from talking too much. Drink, fire, and chance -meeting 
are pleasant enough, but, well - this isn't the Shire. There are queer folk 
about. Though I say it as shouldn't, you may think,' he added with a wry 





through Bree lately,' he went on, watching Frodo's face. 

Frodo returned his gaze but said nothing; and Strider made no further 

Frodo became aware that the ridiculous young Took, encouraged by his success 
with the fat Mayor of Michel Delving, was now actually giving a comic 
account of Bilbo's farewell party. He was already giving an imitation of the 


Frodo was annoyed. It was a harmless enough tale for most of the local 
hobbits, no doubt: just a funny story about those funny people away beyond 
the River; but some (old Butterbur, for instance) knew a thing or two, and 

the name of Baggins to their minds, especially if there had been inquiries 


Frodo fidgeted, wondering what to do. Pippin was evidently much 
enjoying the attention he was getting, and had become quite forgetful of 
their danger. Frodo had a sudden fear that in his present mood he might even 


'You had better do something quick!' whispered Strider in his ear. 

Frodo jumped up and stood on a table, and began to talk. The attention 

laughed and clapped, thinking that Mr. Underhill had taken as much ale as 


Frodo suddenly felt very foolish, and found himself (as was his habit 
when making a speech) fingering the things in his pocket. He felt the Ring 

and vanish out of the silly situation. It seemed to him, somehow, as if me 
suggestion came to him from outside, from someone or something a the room. 
He resisted the temptation firmly, and clasped the Ring in his hand, as if 
to keep a hold on it and prevent it from escaping or doing any mischief. At 

they would have said in the Shire: We are all very much gratified by the 
kindness of your reception, and I venture to hope that my brief visit will 
help to renew the old ties of friendship between the Shire and Bree; and 


Everyone in the room was now looking at him. 'A song!' shouted one of 





sing us something that we haven’t heard before!' 

For a moment Frodo stood gaping. Then in desperation he began a 

of, for he had made up the words himself). It was about an inn; and that is 
probably why it came into Frodo's mind just then. Here it is in full. Only a 


There is an inn, a merry old inn 



That the Man in the Moon himself came down 



that plays a five-stringed fiddle; 




now sawing in the middle. 




When there's good cheer among the guests, 




They also keep a horned cow 




And makes her wave her tufted tail 



and the store of silver spoons! 




on Saturday afternoons. 










A dish and a spoon on the table danced, 


and the little dog chased his tail. 




And there he dozed and dreamed of ale, 




Then the ostler said to his tipsy cat: 



They neigh and champ their silver bits; 




So the cat on his fiddle played hey-diddle-diddle, 


He squeaked and sawed and quickened the tune, 

'It's after three!' he said. 




While his horses galloped up in rear, 




Now quicker the fiddle went deedle-dum-diddle; 


The cow and the horses stood on their heads; 




With a ping and a pong the fiddle-strings broke! 





And the little dog laughed to see such fun, 




The round Moon rolled behind the hill 




For though it was day, to her surprise 


There was loud and long applause. Frodo had a good voice, and the song 
tickled their fancy. 'Where's old Barley?' they cried. 'He ought to hear 


They called for more ale, and began to shout: 'Let's have it again, master! 


They made Frodo have another drink, and then begin his song again, 
while many of them joined in; for the tune was well known, and they were 
quick at picking up words. It was now Frodo's turn to feel pleased with 

the cow jumped over the Moon, he leaped in the air. Much too vigorously; for 
he came down, bang, into a tray full of mugs, and slipped, and rolled off 
the table with a crash, clatter, and bump! The audience all opened their 

disappeared. He simply vanished, as if he had gone slap through the floor 


The local hobbits stared in amazement, and then sprang to their feet 
and shouted for Barliman. All the company drew away from Pippin and Sam, 


found themselves left alone in a comer, and eyed darkly and doubtfully from 

companions of a travelling magician of unknown powers and purpose. But 


was one swarthy Bree-lander, who stood looking at them with a knowing and 
half-mocking expression that made them feel very uncomfortable. Presently he 

been whispering together a good deal during the evening. Harry the 
gatekeeper also went out just behind them.. 






the tables to the dark comer by Strider, who sat unmoved, giving no sign of 
his thoughts. Frodo leaned back against the wall and took off the Ring. How 
it came to be on his finger he could not tell. He could only suppose that he 

slipped on when he stuck out his hand with a jerk to save his fall. For a 
moment he wondered if the Ring itself had not played him a trick; perhaps it 
had tried to reveal itself in response to some wish or command that was felt 


'Well?' said Strider, when he reappeared. ’Why did you do that? Worse 
than anything your friends could have said! You have put your foot in it! Or 


'I don't know what you mean,' said Frodo, annoyed and alarmed. 

'Oh yes, you do,' answered Strider; 'but we had better wait until the 

quiet word with you.' 



'A matter of some importance - to us both,' answered Strider, looking 
Frodo in the eye. 'You may hear something to your advantage.' 





come trotting in, and he was now trying to listen to several conflicting 


'I saw him, Mr. Butterbur,' said a hobbit; 'or leastways I didn't see 
him, if you take my meaning. He just vanished into thin air, in a manner of 


'You don't say, Mr. Mugwort!' said the landlord, looking puzzled. 



'There's some mistake somewhere,' said Butterbur, shaking his head. 
There was too much of that Mr. Underhill to go vanishing into thin air; or 


'Well, where is he now?' cried several voices. 

'How should I know? He's welcome to go where he will, so long as he 


'Well, I saw what I saw, and I saw what I didn't,' said Mugwort 


'And I say there's some mistake,' repeated Butterbur, picking up the 






'Of course there's a mistake!' said Frodo. 'I haven't vanished. Here I 
am! I've just been having a few words with Strider in the comer.' 


away,, even more perturbed than before. They were not in the least satisfied 
by his explanation that he had crawled away quickly under the tables after 
he had fallen. Most of the Hobbits and the Men of Bree went off then and 

or two gave Frodo a black look and departed muttering among themselves. 



Dwarves and the two or three strange Men that still remained got up and said 
good night to the landlord, but not to Frodo and his friends. Before long no 


Mr. Butterbur did not seem much put out. He reckoned, very probably, 
that his house would be full again on many future nights, until the present 
mystery had been thoroughly discussed. 'Now what have you been doing, Mr. 

with your acrobatics!' 


unintentional, I assure you. A most unfortunate accident.' 

'All right, Mr. Underhill! But if you're going to do any more tumbling, 

me. We're a bit suspicious round here of anything out of the way -uncanny, 
if you understand me; and we don't take to it all of a sudden.' 

'I shan't be doing anything of the sort again, Mr. Butterbur, I promise 

start. Will you see that our ponies are ready by eight o'clock?' 

'Very good! But before you go, I should like a word with you in 

to tell you. I hope that you'll not take it amiss. When I've seen to a thing 
or two, I'll come along to your room, if you're willing.' 


private talks he would have before he got to bed, and what they would 
reveal. Were these people all in league against him? He began to suspect 





Chapter 10. Strider 




light. Merry was not there, and the fire had burned low. It was not until 
they had puffed up the embers into a blaze and thrown on a couple of faggots 
that they discovered Strider had come with them. There he was calmly sitting 


'Hallo!' said Pippin. 'Who are you, and what do you want?' 


it, your friend promised to have a quiet talk with me.' 

'You said I might hear something to my advantage, I believe,' said 


'Several things,' answered Strider. 'But, of course, I have my price.' 



'Don't be alarmed! I mean just this: I will tell you what I know, and 


'And what will that be, pray?' said Frodo. He suspected now that he had 
fallen in with a rascal, and he thought uncomfortably that he had brought 
only a little money with him. All of it would hardly satisfy a rogue, and he 


'No more than you can afford,' answered Strider with a slow smile, as 

until I wish to leave you.' 


I wanted another companion, I should not agree to any such thing, until I 
knew a good deal more about you, and your business.' 


comfortably. 'You seem to be coming to your senses again, and that is all to 
the good. You have been much too careless so far. Very well! I will tell you 
what I know, and leave the reward to you. You may be glad to grant it, when 




'Too much; too many dark things,' said Strider grimly. 'But as for your 
business — ' He got up and went to the door, opened it quickly and looked 
out. Then he shut it quietly and sat down again. 'I have quick ears,' he 






Now, I was behind the hedge this evening on the Road west of Bree, when four 
hobbits came out of the Downlands. I need not repeat all that they said to 

remember, said one of them, that the name Baggins must not be mentioned. I 
am Mr. Underhill, if any name must be given. That interested me so much that 
I followed them here. I slipped over the gate just behind them. Maybe Mr. 

should advise him and his friends to be more careful.' 

'I don't see what interest my name has for any one in Bree,' said Frodo 
angrily, 'and I have still to learn why it interests you. Mr. Strider may 

advise him to explain it.' 



I was looking for a Hobbit called Frodo Baggins. I wanted to find him 
quickly. I had learned that he was carrying out of the Shire, well, a secret 


'Now, don't mistake me!' he cried, as Frodo rose from his seat, and Sam 
jumped up with a scowl. 'I shall take more care of the secret than you do. 


shadow!' he said in a low voice. 'Black horsemen have passed through Bree. 
On Monday one came down the Greenway, they say; and another appeared 




There was a silence. At last Frodo spoke to Pippin and Sam: 'I ought to 
have guessed it from the way the gatekeeper greeted us,' he said. 'And the 
landlord seems to have heard something. Why did he press us to join the 

stayed quiet in here.' 


going into the common-room, if I could; but the innkeeper would not let me 


'Do you think he ' began Frodo. 


altogether like mysterious vagabonds of my sort.' Frodo gave him a puzzled 
look. 'Well, I have rather a rascally look, have I not?' said Strider with a 
curl of his lip and a queer gleam in his eye. 'But I hope we shall get to 





at the end of your song. For that little prank ' 



'I wonder,' said Strider. 'Accident, then. That accident has made your 


'Hardly more than it was already,' said Frodo. 'I knew these horsemen 
were pursuing me; but now at any rate they seem to have missed me and to 


'You must not count on that!' said Strider sharply. 'They will return. 


Riders.' He paused, and his eyes were cold and hard. 'And there are some 
folk in Bree who are not to be trusted,' he went on. 'Bill Ferny, for 
instance. He has an evil name in the Bree-land, and queer folk call at his 

fellow. He was very close with one of the Southern strangers, and they 
slipped out together just after your "accident". Not all of those 
Southerners mean well; and as for Ferny, he would sell anything to anybody; 


'What will Ferny sell, and what has my accident got to do with him?' 


'News of you, of course,' answered Strider. 'An account of your 
performance would be very interesting to certain people. After that they 

that they will hear of it before this night is over. Is that enough? You can 
do as you like about my reward: take me as a guide or not. But I may say 
that I know all the lands between the Shire and the Misty Mountains, for I 

prove useful. You will have to leave the open road after tonight; for the 
horsemen will watch it night and day. You may escape from Bree, and be 
allowed to go forward while the Sun is up; but you won't go far. They will 

wish them to find you? They are terrible!' 

The hobbits looked at him, and saw with surprise that his face was 

room was very quiet and still, and the light seemed to have grown dim. For a 
while he sat with unseeing eyes as if walking in distant memory or listening 





'There!' he cried after a moment, drawing his hand across his brow. 
'Perhaps I know more about these pursuers than you do. You fear them, but 

can. Strider can take you by paths that are seldom trodden. Will you have 


There was a heavy silence. Frodo made no answer, his mind was confused 
with doubt and fear. Sam frowned, and looked at his master; and at last he 


'With your leave, Mr. Frodo, I'd say no! This Strider here, he warns 

comes out of the Wild, and I never heard no good of such folk. He knows 
something, that's plain, and more than I like; but it's no reason why we 
should let him go leading us out into some dark place far from help, as he 



but turned his keen eyes on Frodo. Frodo caught his glance and looked away. 
'No,' he said slowly. 'I don't agree. I think, I think you are not really as 
you choose to look. You began to talk to me like the Bree-folk, but your 

warn us to take care, and yet ask us to take you on trust. Why the disguise? 
Who are you? What do you really know about - about my business; and how 




'The lesson in caution has been well learned,' said Strider with a grim 
smile. 'But caution is one thing and wavering is another. You will never get 

make up your mind. I will answer some of your questions, if that will help 
you to do so. But why should you believe my story, if you do not trust me 


At that moment there came a knock at the door. Mr. Butterbur had 
arrived with candles, and behind him was Nob with cans of hot water. Strider 


'I've come to bid you good night,' said the landlord, putting the 

shut the door. 


done any harm, I'm sorry indeed. But one thing drives out another, as you'll 




admit; and I'm a busy man. But first one thing and then another this week 
have jogged my memory, as the saying goes; and not too late I hope. You see, 

Baggins in particular.' 



'Ah! you know best,' said the landlord, knowingly. 'I won't give you 
away; but I was told that this Baggins would be going by the name of 

say so.' 



'A stout little fellow with red cheeks, ' said Mr. Butterbur solemnly. 

Pippin chuckled, but Sam looked indignant. 'That won't help you much; it 

a glance at Pippin. 'But this one is taller than some and fairer than most, 
and he has a cleft in his chin: perky chap with a bright eye. Begging your 


'He said it? And who was he?' asked Frodo eagerly. 

'Ah! That was Gandalf, if you know who I mean. A wizard they say he is, 

he'll have to say to me, if I see him again: turn all my ale sour or me into 
a block of wood, I shouldn't wonder. He's a bit hasty. Still what's done 


'Well, what have you done?' said Frodo, getting impatient with the slow 


'Where was I?' said the landlord, pausing and snapping his fingers. 

'Ah, yes ! Old Gandalf. Three months back he walked right into my room 

something for me? You've only to name it, I said. I'm in a hurry, said he, 
and I've no time myself, but I want a message took to the Shire. Have you 
anyone you can send, and trust to go? I can find someone, I said, tomorrow, 



'It's addressed plain enough,' said Mr. Butterbur, producing a letter 
from his pocket, and reading out the address slowly and proudly (he valued 


Mr FRODO BAGGINS, BAG END, HOBBITON in the SHIRE. 






'Ah!' said Mr. Butterbur. 'Then your right name is Baggins?' 

'It is,' said Frodo, 'and you had better give me that letter at once, 

suppose, though you've taken a long time to come to the point.' 

Poor Mr. Butterbur looked troubled. 'You're right, master,' he said, 

'and I beg your pardon. And I'm mortal afraid of what Gandalf will say, if 


Then I couldn't find nobody willing to go to the Shire next day, nor the day 
after, and none of my own folk were to spare; and then one thing after 
another drove it out of my mind. I'm a busy man. I'll do what I can to set 


'Leaving the letter aside, I promised Gandalf no less. Barley, he says 
to me, this friend of mine from the Shire, he may be coming out this way 
before long, him and another. He'll be calling himself Underhill. Mind that! 

trouble, and he may need help. Do whatever you can for him, and I'll be 
grateful, he says. And here you are, and trouble is not far off, seemingly.' 



'These black men,' said the landlord lowering his voice. 'They're 
looking for Baggins, and if they mean well, then I'm a hobbit. It was on 




called it. Nob, he came and told me that two black men were at the door 
asking for a hobbit called Baggins. Nob's hair was all stood on end. I bid 
the black fellows be off, and slammed the door on them; but they've been 

Strider, he's been asking questions, too. Tried to get in here to see you, 


'Fie did!' said Strider suddenly, coming forward into the light. 'And 
much trouble would have been saved, if you had let him in, Barliman.' 

The landlord jumped with surprise. 'You!' he cried. 'You're always 


'He's here with my leave,' said Frodo. 'He came to offer me his help.' 


suspiciously at Strider. 'But if I was in your plight, I wouldn't take up 


'Then who would you take up with?' asked Strider. 'A fat innkeeper who 




only remembers his own name because people shout it at him all day? They 
cannot stay in The Pony for ever, and they cannot go home. They have a long 


'Me? Leave Bree! I wouldn't do that for any money,' said Mr. Butterbur, 
looking really scared. 'But why can't you stay here quiet for a bit, Mr. 

after, and where do they come from, I'd like to know?' 

'I'm sorry I can't explain it all,' answered Frodo. 'I am tired and 
very worried, and it's a long tale. But if you mean to help me, I ought to 

Black Riders: I am not sure, but I think, I fear they come from ' 

'They come from Mordor,' said Strider in a low voice. 'From Mordor, 


'Save us!' cried Mr. Butterbur turning pale; the name evidently was 
known to him. 'That is the worst news that has come to Bree in my time.' 'It 


Butterbur. 'More than ever. Though I don't know what the likes of me can do 


'Against the Shadow in the East,' said Strider quietly. 'Not much, 
Barliman, but every little helps. You can let Mr. Underhill stay here 
tonight, as Mr. Underhill, and you can forget the name of Baggins, till he 



help from me, I'm afraid. It's a pity Mr. Baggins drew attention to himself 
this evening, to say no more. The story of that Mr. Bilbo's going off has 
been heard before tonight in Bree. Even our Nob has been doing some guessing 

is.' 



'I hope not, indeed,' said Butterbur. 'But spooks or no spooks, they 
won't get in The Pony so easy. Don't you worry till the morning. Nob'll say 

and my folk'll keep watch tonight; but you had best get some sleep, if you 


'In any case we must be called at dawn,' said Frodo. 'We must get off 
as early as possible. Breakfast at six-thirty, please.' 






Baggins - Underhill, I should say! Good night - now, bless me! Where's your 


'I don’t know,' said Frodo with sudden anxiety. They had forgotten all 
about Merry, and it was getting late. 'I am afraid he is out. He said 


'Well, you do want looking after and no mistake: your party might be on 
a holiday!' said Butterbur. 'I must go and bar the doors quick, but I'll see 

Good night to you all!' At last Mr. Butterbur went out, with another 
doubtful look at Strider and a shake of his head. His footsteps retreated 


'Well?' said Strider. 'When are you going to open that letter?' Frodo 
looked carefully at the seal before he broke it. It seemed certainly to be 

the following message: 





Bad news has reached me here. I must go off at once. You had better 
leave Bag End soon, and get out of the Shire before the end of July at 
latest. I will return as soon as I can; and I will follow you, if I find 

You can trust the landlord (Butterbur). You may meet a friend of mine on the 
Road: a Man, lean, dark, tall, by some called Strider. He knows our business 
and will help you. Make for Rivendell. There I hope we may meet again. If I 






PS. Do NOT use It again, not far any reason whatever! Do not travel by 


PPS. Make sure that it is the real Strider. There are many strange men 


All that is gold does not glitter, 





Deep roots are not reached by the frost. 



A light from the shadows shall spring; 









PPPS. I hope Butterbur sends this promptly. A worthy man, but his 
memory is like a lumber-roam: thing wanted always buried. If he forgets, I 




Frodo read the letter to himself, and then passed it to Pippin and Sam. 
'Really old Butterbur has made a mess of things!' he said. 'He deserves 

Rivendell by now. But what can have happened to Gandalf? He writes as if he 


'He has been doing that for many years,' said Strider. 

Frodo turned and looked at him thoughtfully, wondering about Gandalf s 
second postscript. 'Why didn't you tell me that you were Gandalf s friend at 


'Would it? Would any of you have believed me till now?' said Strider. 


trust me without proofs, if I was to help you. In any case, I did not intend 
to tell you all about myself at once. I had to study you first, and make 
sure of you. The Enemy has set traps for me before now. As soon as I had 

admit,' he added with a queer laugh, 'that I hoped you would take to me for 
my own sake. A hunted man sometimes wearies of distrust and longs for 
friendship. But there, I believe my looks are against me.' 


relief after reading Gandalf's letter. 'But handsome is as handsome does, as 
we say in the Shire; and I daresay we shall all look much the same after 


'It would take more than a few days, or weeks, or years, of wandering 
in the Wild to make you look like Strider,' he answered. 'And you would die 


Pippin subsided; but Sam was not daunted, and he still eyed Strider 
dubiously. 'How do we know you are the Strider that Gandalf speaks about?' 

might be a play-acting spy, for all I can see, trying to get us to go with 




you. You might have done in the real Strider and took his clothes. What have 


'That you are a stout fellow,' answered Strider; 'but I am afraid my 
only answer to you, Sam Gamgee, is this. If I had killed the real Strider, I 
could kill you. And I should have killed you already without so much talk. 



He stood up, and seemed suddenly to grow taller. In his eyes gleamed a 
light, keen and commanding. Throwing back his cloak, he laid his hand on the 

move. Sam sat wide-mouthed staring at him dumbly. 

'But I am the real Strider, fortunately,' he said, looking down at them 

if by life or death I can save you, I will.' 


believed that you were a friend before the letter came,' he said, 'or at 
least I wished to. You have frightened me several times tonight, but never 
in the way that servants of the Enemy would, or so I imagine. I think one of 
his spies would - well, seem fairer and feel fouler, if you understand.' 


that is gold does not glitter, not all those who wander are lost ' 

'Did the verses apply to you then?' asked Frodo. 'I could not make out 

letter, if you have never seen it?' 


with that name.' He drew out his sword, and they saw that the blade was 
indeed broken a foot below the hilt. 'Not much use is it, Sam?' said 
Strider. 'But the time is near when it shall be forged anew.' 





Strider shall be your guide. We shall have a rough road tomorrow. Even if we 
are allowed to leave Bree unhindered, we can hardly hope now to leave it 
unnoticed. But I shall try to get lost as soon as possible. I know one or 
two ways out of Bree-land other than the main road. If once we shake off the 




'It is a hill, just to the north of the Road, about half way from here 
to Rivendell. It commands a wide view all round; and there we shall have a 




chance to look about us. Gandalf will make for that point, if he follows us. 

to choose between various dangers.' 

’When did you last see Gandalf?' asked Frodo. 'Do you know where he is, 



in the spring. I have often kept watch on the borders of the Shire in the 
last few years, when he was busy elsewhere. He seldom left it unguarded. We 
last met on the first of May: at Sam Ford down the Brandywine. He told me 
that his business with you had gone well, and that you would be starting for 

went away on a journey of my own. And that has proved ill; for plainly some 
news reached him, and I was not at hand to help. 


have had messages, even if he could not come himself. When I returned, many 
days ago, I heard the ill news. The tidings had gone far and wide that 
Gandalf was missing and the horsemen had been seen. It was the Elven-folk of 

home; but there was no news of your leaving Buckland. I have been watching 


'Do you think the Black Riders have anything to do with it - with 


'I do not know of anything else that could have hindered him, except 
the Enemy himself,' said Strider. 'But do not give up hope ! Gandalf is 
greater than you Shire-folk know - as a rule you can only see his jokes and 


Pippin yawned. 'I am sorry,' he said, 'but I am dead tired. In spite of 
all the danger and worry I must go to bed, or sleep where I sit. Where is 

the dark to look for him.' 


passage. Merry came in with a rush followed by Nob. He shut the door 
hastily, and leaned against it. He was out of breath. They stared at him in 
alarm for a moment before he gasped: 'I have seen them, Frodo! I have seen 




'Here. In the village. I stayed indoors for an hour. Then as you did 




not come back, I went out for a stroll. I had come back again and was 
standing just outside the light of the lamp looking at the stars. Suddenly I 

of deeper shade among the shadows across the road, just beyond the edge of 
the lamplight. It slid away at once into the dark without a sound. There was 


'Which way did it go?' asked Strider, suddenly and sharply. Merry 


'This is a friend of Gandalf's. I will explain later.' 

'It seemed to make off up the Road, eastward,' continued Merry. 'I 

corner and on as far as the last house on the Road.' 

Strider looked at Merry with wonder. 'You have a stout heart,' he said; 



'I don't know,' said Merry. 'Neither brave nor silly, I think. I could 

suddenly I heard voices by the hedge. One was muttering; and the other was 
whispering, or hissing. I couldn't hear a word that was said. I did not 
creep any closer, because I began to tremble all over. Then I felt 

something came behind me and I... I fell over.' 


lantern. I went down to West-gate, and then back up towards South-gate. Just 
nigh Bill Ferny's house I thought I could see something in the Road. I 
couldn't swear to it, but it looked to me as if two men was stooping over 

was no signs of them, and only Mr. Brandybuck lying by the roadside. He 
seemed to be asleep. "I thought I had fallen into deep water," he says to 
me, when I shook him. Very queer he was, and as soon as I had roused him, he 


'I am afraid that's true,' said Merry, 'though I don't know what I 
said. I had an ugly dream, which I can't remember. I went to pieces. I don't 


'I do,' said Strider. 'The Black Breath. The Riders must have left 

will know all the news now, for they have visited Bill Ferny; and probably 
that Southerner was a spy as well. Something may happen in the night, before 






'What will happen?' said Merry. 'Will they attack the inn?' 'No, I 
think not,' said Strider. 'They are not all here yet. And in any case that 

openly attack a house where there are lights and many people -not until they 
are desperate, not while all the long leagues of Eriador still lie before 
us. But their power is in terror, and already some in Bree are in their 

the strangers, and, maybe, the gatekeeper too. They had words with Harry at 
West-gate on Monday. I was watching them. He was white and shaking when 




'We seem to have enemies all round,' said Frodo. 'What are we to do?' 


out which those are. The hobbit-rooms have windows looking north and close 
to the ground. We will all remain together and bar this window and the door. 


While Strider was gone, Frodo gave Merry a rapid account of all that 
had happened since supper. Merry was still reading and pondering Gandalf's 


'Well Masters,' said Nob, 'I've ruffled up the clothes and put in a 
bolster down the middle of each bed. And I made a nice imitation of your 
head with a brown woollen mat, Mr. Bag - Underhill, sir,' he added with a 



they have penetrated the disguise?' 




'Good night to you,' said Nob, and went off to take his part in the 


Their bags and gear they piled on the parlour-floor. They pushed a low 
chair against the door and shut the window. Peering out, Frodo saw that the 
night was still clear. The Sickle was swinging bright above the shoulders of 

curtains together. Strider built up the fire and blew out all the candles. 

The hobbits lay down on their blankets with their feet towards the 
hearth; but Strider settled himself in the chair against the door. They 






'Jumped over the Moon!' chuckled Merry as he rolled himself in his 
blanket. 'Very ridiculous of you, Frodo! But I wish I had been there to see. 


'I hope so,' said Strider. Then they all fell silent, and one by one 
the hobbits dropped off to sleep. 








As they prepared for sleep in the inn at Bree, darkness lay on 

Crickhollow stood silent. Fatty Bolger opened the door cautiously and peered 
out. A feeling of fear had been growing on him all day, and he was unable to 
rest or go to bed: there was a brooding threat in the breathless night-air. 


gate seemed to open of its own accord and close again without a sound. 
Terror seized him. He shrank back, and for a moment he stood trembling in 


The night deepened. There came the soft sound of horses led with 
stealth along the lane. Outside the gate they stopped, and three black 
figures entered, like shades of night creeping across the ground. One went 

stood, as still as the shadows of stones, while night went slowly on. The 
house and the quiet trees seemed to be waiting breathlessly. 


cold hour before dawn was passing. The figure by the door moved. In the dark 
without moon or stars a drawn blade gleamed, as if a chill light had been 
unsheathed. There was a blow, soft but heavy, and the door shuddered. 



At a second blow the door yielded and fell back, with timbers burst and 
lock broken. The black figures passed swiftly in. 


night like fire on a hill -top. 



Fatty Bolger had not been idle. As soon as he saw the dark shapes creep 

out of the back door, through the garden, and over the fields. When he 
reached the nearest house, more than a mile away, he collapsed on the 
doorstep. 'No, no, no!' he was crying. 'No, not me! I haven't got it!' It 



last they got the idea that enemies were in Buckland, some strange invasion 




from the Old Forest. And then they lost no more time. 



The Brandybucks were blowing the Horn-call of Buckland, that had not 

Fell Winter, when the Brandywine was frozen over. 



Far-away answering horns were heard. The alarm was spreading. The black 
figures fled from the house. One of them let fall a hobbit-cloak on the 

a gallop, went hammering away into the darkness. All about Crickhollow there 
was the sound of horns blowing, and voices crying and feet running. But the 
Black Riders rode like a gale to the North-gate. Let the little people blow! 

knew now that the house was empty and the Ring had gone. They rode down 


guards at the gate and vanished from the Shire. 


sound or presence had disturbed him. He saw that Strider was sitting alert 
in his chair: his eyes gleamed in the light of the fire, which had been 
tended and was burning brightly; but he made no sign or movement. 


the noise of wind and of galloping hoofs. The wind seemed to be curling 
round the house and shaking it; and far off he heard a horn blowing wildly. 


Strider had drawn the curtains and pushed back the shutters with a clang. 

The first grey light of day was in the room, and a cold air was coming 


As soon as Strider had roused them all, he led the way to their 
bedrooms. When they saw them they were glad that they had taken his advice: 

flapping; the beds were tossed about, and the bolsters slashed and flung 
upon the floor; the brown mat was torn to pieces. 


looked sleepy and frightened. He had hardly closed his eyes all night (so he 
said), but he had never heard a sound. 


hands in horror. ’Guests unable to sleep in their beds, and good bolsters 






'Dark times,' said Strider. 'But for the present you may be left in 
peace, when you have got rid of us. We will leave at once. Never mind about 
breakfast: a drink and a bite standing will have to do. We shall be packed 


Mr. Butterbur hurried off to see that their ponies were got ready, and 

vanished! The stable-doors had all been opened in the night, and they were 
gone: not only Merry's ponies, but every other horse and beast in the place. 

Frodo was crushed by the news. How could they hope to reach Rivendell 

Moon. Strider sat silent for a while, looking at the hobbits, as if he was 
weighing up their strength and courage. 


thoughtfully, as if he guessed what Frodo had in mind. 'We should not go 
much slower on foot, not on the roads that I mean to take. I was going to 

on getting anything to eat between here and Rivendell, except what we take 
with us; and we ought to take plenty to spare; for we may be delayed, or 
forced to go round-about, far out of the direct way. How much are you 


'As much as we must,' said Pippin with a sinking heart, but trying to 


'I can carry enough for two,' said Sam defiantly. 

'Can't anything be done, Mr. Butterbur?' asked Frodo. 'Can't we get a 

suppose we could hire them, but we might be able to buy them,' he added, 


'I doubt it,' said the landlord unhappily. 'The two or three 
riding-ponies that there were in Bree were stabled in my yard, and they're 
gone. As for other animals, horses or ponies for draught or what not, there 

can. I'll rout out Bob and send him round as soon as may be.' 

'Yes,' said Strider reluctantly, 'you had better do that. I am afraid 

starting early, and slipping away quietly! We might as well have blown a 
horn to announce our departure. That was part of their plan, no doubt.' 




'There is one crumb of comfort,' said Merry, 'and more than a crumb, I 

hold of Nob!' 


the report that no horse or pony was to be got for love or money in the 
neighbourhood - except one: Bill Ferny had one that he might possibly sell. 

'A poor old half-starved creature it is,' said Bob; 'but he won't part with 

Bill Ferny.' 


bolt back to him with all our stuff, or help in tracking us, or something?' 

'I wonder,' said Strider. 'But I cannot imagine any animal running home 

Master Ferny's: just a way of increasing his profits from the affair. The 
chief danger is that the poor beast is probably at death's door. But there 
does not seem any choice. What does he want for it?' 


least three times the pony's value in those pans. It proved to be a bony, 
underfed, and dispirited animal; but it did not look like dying just yet. 

Mr. Butterbur paid for it himself, and offered Merry another eighteen pence 

well-off as things were reckoned in Bree; but thirty silver pennies was a 
sore blow to him, and being cheated by Bill Ferny made it harder to bear. 


out later that only one horse had been actually stolen. The others had been 
driven off, or had bolted in terror, and were found wandering in different 
corners of the Bree-land. Merry's ponies had escaped altogether, and 

search of Fatty Lumpkin. So they came under the care of Tom Bombadil for a 
while, and were well-off. But when news of the events at Bree came to Tom's 
ears, he sent them to Mr. Butterbur, who thus got five good beasts at a very 
fair price. They had to work harder in Bree, but Bob treated them well; so 

they never came to Rivendell. 


for good, or for bad. And he had other troubles. For there was a great 
commotion as soon as the remaining guests were astir and heard news of the 




raid on the inn. The southern travellers had lost several horses and blamed 

also disappeared in the night, none other than Bill Ferny's squint-eyed 
companion. Suspicion fell on him at once. 


Butterbur angrily, 'you ought to pay for all the damage yourselves and not 
come shouting at me. Go and ask Ferny where your handsome friend is!' But it 
appeared that he was nobody's friend, and nobody could recollect when he had 


After their breakfast the hobbits had to re-pack, and get together 

close on ten o'clock before they at last got off. By that time the whole of 
Bree was buzzing with excitement. Frodo's vanishing trick; the appearance of 
the black horsemen; the robbing of the stables; and not least the news that 

would last for many uneventful years. Most of the inhabitants of Bree and 
Staddle, and many even from Combe and Archet, were crowded in the road 


see the travellers start. The other guests in the inn were at the doors or 


Strider had changed his mind, and he decided to leave Bree by the main 

worse: half the inhabitants would follow them, to see what they were up to, 
and to prevent them from trespassing. 


many thanks. 'I hope we shall meet again some day, when things are merry 
once more,' said Frodo. 'I should like nothing better than to stay in your 


They tramped off, anxious and downhearted, under the eyes of the crowd. 
Not all the faces were friendly, nor all the words that were shouted. But 

he stared at shut their mouths and drew away. He walked in front with Frodo; 
next came Merry and Pippin; and last came Sam leading the pony, which was 
laden with as much of their baggage as they had the heart to give it; but 

fortunes. Sam was chewing an apple thoughtfully. He had a pocket full of 
them: a parting present from Nob and Bob. 'Apples for walking, and a pipe 




for sitting,' he said. 'But I reckon I'll miss them both before long.' 


doors, or popped over walls and fences, as they passed. But as they drew 
near to the further gate, Frodo saw a dark ill-kept house behind a thick 
hedge: the last house in the village. In one of the windows he caught a 


'So that's where that southerner is hiding!' he thought. 'He looks more 


Over the hedge another man was staring boldly. He had heavy black 
brows, and dark scornful eyes; his large mouth curled in a sneer. He was 

and spat. 


last?' Strider nodded, but did not answer. 'Morning, my little friends!' he 
said to the others. 'I suppose you know who you've taken up with? That's 
Stick -at-naught Strider, that is! Though I've heard other names not so 

old pony! Pah!' He spat again. 


of sight, or it will get hurt.' With a sudden flick, quick as lightning, an 
apple left his hand and hit Bill square on the nose. He ducked too late, and 
curses came from behind the hedge. 'Waste of a good apple,' said Sam 


At last they left the village behind. The escort of children and 

South-gate. Passing through, they kept on along the Road for some miles. It 
bent to the left, curving back into its eastward line as it rounded the feet 

country. To their left they could see some of the houses and hobbit -holes of 
Staddle on the gentler south-eastern slopes of the hill; down in a deep 
hollow away north of the Road there were wisps of rising smoke that showed 




After the Road had run down some way, and had left Bree-hill standing 
tall and brown behind, they came on a narrow track that led off towards the 
North. 'This is where we leave the open and take to cover,' said Strider. 






woods nearly ended in disaster.' 


short or long, don't go wrong.' He took a look up and down the Road. No one 
was in sight; and he led the way quickly down towards the wooded valley. 

His plan, as far as they could understand it without knowing the 

the east, and then to steer as straight as he could over the wild lands to 
Weathertop Hill. In that way they would, if all went well, cut off a great 
loop of the Road, which further on bent southwards to avoid the Midgewater 

themselves, and Strider's description of them was not encouraging. 

However, in the meanwhile, walking was not unpleasant. Indeed, if it 
had not been for the disturbing events of the night before, they would have 

shining, clear but not too hot. The woods in the valley were still leafy and 
full of colour, and seemed peaceful and wholesome. Strider guided them 
confidently among the many crossing paths, although left to themselves they 

turns and doublings, to put off any pursuit. 

'Bill Ferny will have watched where we left the Road, for certain,' he 

round here well enough, but he knows he is not a match for me in a wood. It 
is what he may tell others that I am afraid of. I don't suppose they are far 


Whether because of Strider's skill or for some other reason, they saw 
no sign and heard no sound of any other living thing all that day: neither 
two-footed, except birds; nor four-footed, except one fox and a few 

still all was quiet and peaceful. On the third day out from Bree they came 
out of the Chetwood. The land had been falling steadily, ever since they 
turned aside from the Road, and they now entered a wide flat expanse of 

the Bree-land, out in the pathless wilderness, and drawing near to the 


The ground now became damp, and in places boggy and here and there they 
came upon pools, and wide stretches of reeds and rushes filled with the 
warbling of little hidden birds. They had to pick their way carefully to 





fan-progress, but as they went on, their passage became slower and more 
dangerous. The marshes were bewildering and treacherous, and there was no 
permanent trail even for Rangers to find through their shifting quagmires. 


midges that crept up their sleeves and breeches and into their hair. 

'I am being eaten alive!' cried Pippin. 'Midgewater! There are more 


'What do they live on when they can't get hobbit?' asked Sam, 



camping-place was damp, cold, and uncomfortable; and the biting insects 
would not let them sleep. There were also abominable creatures haunting the 
reeds and tussocks that from the sound of them were evil relatives of the 

neek-breek, breek-neek, unceasingly all the night, until the hobbits were 


The next day, the fourth, was little better, and the night almost as 
comfortless. Though the Neekerbreekers (as Sam called them) had been left 


As Frodo lay, tired but unable to close his eyes, it seemed to him that 
far away there came a light in the eastern sky: it flashed and faded many 


'What is the light?' he said to Strider, who had risen, and was 


'I do not know,' Strider answered. 'It is too distant to make out. It 
is like lightning that leaps up from the hill-tops.' 


flashes, and against them the tall dark figure of Strider, standing silent 
and watchful. At last he passed into uneasy sleep. 


straggling pools and reed-beds of the marshes behind them. The land before 
them began steadily to rise again. Away in the distance eastward they could 
now see a line of hills. The highest of them was at the right of the line 

flattened at the summit. 






far away on our right, runs to the south of it and passes not far from its 
foot. We might reach it by noon tomorrow, if we go straight towards it. I 


’What do you mean?' asked Frodo. 


is close to the Road.' 



'Yes; but the hope is faint. If he comes this way at all, he may not 

unless by luck we arrive almost together, we shall miss one another; it will 
not be safe for him or for us to wait there long. If the Riders fail to find 
us in the wilderness, they are likely to make for Weathertop themselves. It 
commands a wide view all round. Indeed, there are many birds and beasts in 

all the birds are to be trusted, and there are other spies more evil than 


The hobbits looked anxiously at the distant hills. Sam looked up into 
the pale sky, fearing to see hawks or eagles hovering over them with bright 

he said. 



'I think,' answered Strider slowly, as if he was not quite sure, 'I 

make for the line of hills, not for Weathertop. There we can strike a path I 
know that runs at their feet; it will bring us to Weathertop from the north 
and less openly. Then we shall see what we shall see.' 


down. The land became drier and more barren; but mists and vapours lay 
behind them on the marshes. A few melancholy birds were piping and wailing, 
until the round red sun sank slowly into the western shadows; then an empty 

through the cheerful windows of Bag End far away. 


hills to lose itself in the stagnant marshland, and they went up along its 
banks while the light lasted. It was already night when at last they halted 
and made their camp under some stunted alder -trees by the shores of the 
stream. Ahead there loomed now against the dusky sky the bleak and treeless 





not sleep at all. The moon was waxing, and in the early night -hours a cold 


Next morning they set out again soon after sunrise. There was a frost 
in the air, and the sky was a pale clear blue. The hobbits felt refreshed, 
as if they had had a night of unbroken sleep. Already they were getting used 

Shire they would have thought barely enough to keep them on their legs. 
Pippin declared that Frodo was looking twice the hobbit that he had been. 

'Very odd,' said Frodo, tightening his belt, 'considering that there is 

indefinitely, or I shall become a wraith.' 


surprising earnestness. 


almost to a thousand feet, and here and there falling again to low clefts or 
passes leading into the eastern land beyond. Along the crest of the ridge 
the hobbits could see what looked to be the remains of green-grown walls and 



camped. It was the night of the fifth of October, and they were six days out 


In the morning they found, for the first time since they had left the 
Chetwood, a track plain to see. They turned right and followed it 

as much hidden as possible from the view, both of the hill-tops above and of 
the flats to the west. It dived into dells, and hugged steep banks; and 
where it passed over flatter and more open ground on either side of it there 

almost like a hedge. 


along one of these avenues, where the stones were unusually large and 
closely set. 'I am not sure that I like it: it has a - well, rather a 


'No. There is no barrow on Weathertop, nor on any of these hills,' 
answered Strider. 'The Men of the West did not live here; though in their 
latter days they defended the hills for a while against the evil that came 





long before, in the first days of the North Kingdom, they built a great 
watch-tower on Weathertop, Amon Syl they called it. It was burned and 
broken, and nothing remains of it now but a tumbled ring, like a rough crown 

Elendil stood there watching for the coming of Gil-galad out of the West, in 


The hobbits gazed at Strider. It seemed that he was learned in old 
lore, as well as in the ways of the wild. 'Who was Gil-galad?' asked Merry; 
but Strider did not answer, and seemed to be lost in thought. Suddenly a low 






the last whose realm was fair and free 



His sword was long, his lance was keen, 


were mirrored in his silver shield. 



for into darkness fell his star 


The others turned in amazement, for the voice was Sam's. 



'That's all I know,' stammered Sam, blushing. 'I learned it from Mr. 


was always one for hearing about Elves. It was Mr. Bilbo as taught me my 
letters. He was mighty book -learned was dear old Mr. Bilbo. And he wrote 


'He did not make it up,' said Strider. 'It is pan of the lay that is 
called The Fall of Gil-galad, which is in an ancient tongue. Bilbo must have 


'There was a lot more,' said Sam, 'all about Mordor. I didn't learn 
that part, it gave me the shivers I never thought I should be going that way 








'Do not speak that name so loudly!' said Strider. 

It was already mid-day when they drew near the southern end of the 

grey-green bank, leading up like a bridge on to the northward slope of the 
hill They decided to make for the top at once, while the daylight was broad 
Concealment was no longer possible, and they could only hope that no enemy 

Gandalf was anywhere about, there was no sign of him. 

On the western flank of Weathertop they found a sheltered hollow, at 

they left Sam and Pippin with the pony and their packs and luggage. The 
other three went on. After half an hour's plodding climb Strider reached the 
crown of the hill; Frodo and Merry followed, tired and breathless. The last 


On the top they found, as Strider had said, a wide ring of ancient 
stonework, now crumbling or covered with age-long grass. But in the centre a 

About them the turf was burned to the roots and all within the ring the 
grass was scorched and shrivelled, as if flames had swept the hill-top; but 


Standing upon the rim of the ruined circle, they saw all round below 
them a wide prospect, for the most pan of lands empty and featureless, 

here and there the glint of distant water. Beneath them on this southern 
side there ran like a ribbon the Old Road, coming out of the West and 
winding up and down, until it faded behind a ridge of dark land to the east. 

saw the Mountains: the nearer foothills were brown and sombre; 

behind them stood taller shapes of grey, and behind those again were 


'Well, here we are!' said Merry. 'And very cheerless and uninviting it 
looks! There is no water and no shelter. And no sign of Gandalf. But I don't 


'I wonder,' said Strider, looking round thoughtfully. 'Even if he was a 
day or two behind us at Bree, he could have arrived here first. He can ride 




very swiftly when need presses.’ Suddenly he stooped and looked at the stone 

it had escaped the fire. He picked it up and examined it, turning it in his 
fingers. "This has been handled recently,' he said. 'What do you think of 


On the flat under-side Frodo saw some scratches: 'There seems to he a 


'The stroke on the left might be a G-rune with thin branches,' said 
Strider. 'It might be a sign left by Gandalf, though one cannot be sure. The 

something quite different, and have nothing to do with us. Rangers use 
runes, and they come here sometimes.' 



'I should say,' answered Strider, 'that they stood for G3, and were a 
sign that Gandalf was here on October the third: that is three days ago now. 

It would also show that he was in a hurry and danger was at hand, so that he 

so, we must be wary.' 


mean,' said Frodo 'It would be a great comfort to know that he was on the 


'Perhaps,' said Strider. 'For myself, I believe that he was here, and 
was in danger. There have been scorching flames here; and now the light that 
we saw three nights ago in the eastern sky comes back to my mind. I guess 


He is here no longer, and we must now look after ourselves and make our own 
way to Rivendell, as best we can ' 


looked wild and wide from Weathertop. 


Forsaken Inn, a day's journey east of Bree,' answered Strider. 'Some say it 
is so far, and some say otherwise. It is a strange road, and folk are glad 
to reach their journey's end, whether the time is long or short. But I know 

fortune twelve days from here to the Ford of Bruinen, where the Road crosses 
the Loudwater that runs out of Rivendell. We have at least a fortnight's 
journey before us, for I do not think we shall be able to use the Road.' 






'It may,' said Strider. 



In that lonely place Frodo for the first time fully realized his 
homelessness and danger. He wished bitterly that his fortune had left him in 

back westward - to his home. Suddenly he was aware that two black specks 
were moving slowly along it, going westward; and looking again he saw that 
three others were creeping eastward to meet them. He gave a cry and clutched 




At once Strider flung himself on the ground behind the ruined circle, 
pulling Frodo down beside him. Merry threw himself alongside. 



'I do not know, but I fear the worst,' answered Strider. 


through a cleft between two jagged stones. The light was no longer bright, 
for the clear morning had faded, and clouds creeping out of the East had now 

specks, but neither Frodo nor Merry could make out their shapes for certain; 
yet something told them that there, far below, were Black Riders assembling 


'Yes,' said Strider, whose keener sight left him in no doubt. 'The 


Hastily they crept away and slipped down the north side of the hill to 


Sam and Peregrin had not been idle. They had explored the small dell 
and the surrounding slopes. Not far away they found a spring of clear water 
in the hillside, and near it footprints not more than a day or two old. In 

hasty camp. There were some fallen rocks on the edge of the dell nearest to 
the hill. Behind them Sam came upon a small store of firewood neatly 


'I wonder if old Gandalf has been here,' he said to Pippin. 'Whoever it 


Strider was greatly interested in these discoveries. 'I wish I had 
waited and explored the ground down here myself,' he said, hurrying off to 






'It is just as I feared,' he said, when he came back. 'Sam and Pippin 

have been here lately. It is they who left the firewood behind. But there 
are also several newer tracks that were not made by Rangers. At least one 
set was made, only a day or two ago, by heavy boots. At least one. I cannot 

stood in anxious thought. 


Riders. If the horsemen had already found the dell, the sooner Strider led 
them somewhere else the better. Sam viewed the hollow with great dislike, 
now that he had heard news of their enemies on the Road, only a few miles 


'Hadn't we better clear out quick, Mr. Strider?' he asked impatiently. 




'Yes, we certainly must decide what to do at once,' answered Strider, 
looking up and considering the time and the weather. 'Well, Sam,' he said at 
last, 'I do not like this place either; but I cannot think of anywhere 

for the moment, and if we moved we should be much more likely to be seen 
spies. All we could do would be to go right out of our way back north on 
this side of the line of hills, where the land is all much the same as it is 

take cover in the thickets away to the south. On the north side of the Road 
beyond the hills the country is bare and flat for miles.' 


used their noses rather than their eyes, smelling for us, if smelling is the 
right word, at least in the daylight. But you made us lie down flat when you 
saw them down below; and now you talk of being seen, if we move.' 


anxious to find some sign of Gandalf; but it was a mistake for three of us 
to go up and stand there so long. For the black horses can see, and the 
Riders can use men and other creatures as spies, as we found at Bree. They 

shadows in their minds, which only the noon sun destroys; and in the dark 
they perceive many signs and forms that are hidden from us: then they are 




most to be feared. And at all times they smell the blood of living things, 

can feel their presence - it troubled our hearts, as soon as we came here, 
and before we saw them; they feel ours more keenly. Also,' he added, and his 


'Is there no escape then?' said Frodo, looking round wildly. 'If I move 
I shall be seen and hunted! If I stay, I shall draw them to me!' 

Strider laid his hand on his shoulder. 'There is still hope,' he said. 


a sign. There is little shelter or defence here, but fire shall serve for 
both. Sauron can put fire to his evil uses, as he can all things, but these 
Riders do not love it, and fear those who wield it. Fire is our friend in 


'Maybe,' muttered Sam. 'It is also as good a way of saying "here we 


Down in the lowest and most sheltered corner of the dell they lit a 

cold. They were suddenly aware of great hunger, for they had not eaten 
anything since breakfast; but they dared not make more than a frugal supper. 
The lands ahead were empty of all save birds and beasts, unfriendly places 

hills, but they were few and did not stay. Other wanderers were rare, and of 
evil sort: trolls might stray down at times out of the northern valleys of 
the Misty Mountains. Only on the Road would travellers be found, most often 

words to spare for strangers. 

'I don't see how our food can be made to last,' said Frodo. 'We have 

we have used more than we ought, if we have two weeks still to go, and 


'There is food in the wild,' said Strider; 'berry, root, and herb; and 
I have some skill as a hunter at need. You need not be afraid of starving 

and we need haste. So tighten your belts, and think with hope of the tables 


The cold increased as darkness came on. Peering out from the edge of 
the dell they could see nothing but a grey land now vanishing quickly into 




shadow. The sky above had cleared again and was slowly filled with twinkling 

garment and blanket they possessed; but Strider was content with a single 
cloak, and sat a little apart, drawing thoughtfully at his pipe. 

As night fell and the light of the fire began to shine out brightly he 

histories and legends of long ago, of Elves and Men and the good and evil 
deeds of the Elder Days. They wondered how old he was, and where he had 


Tell us of Gil-galad,’ said Merry suddenly, when he paused at the end 

you spoke of?' 


us closely.' Merry and Pippin looked at Frodo, who was staring into the 


'I know only the little that Gandalf has told me,' said Frodo slowly. 
'Gil-galad was the last of the great Elf-kings of Middle-earth. Gil-galad is 

of ' 


told now with the servants of the Enemy at hand. If we win through to the 
house of Elrond, you may hear it there, told in full.' 


about the Elves before the fading time. I would dearly like to hear more 
about Elves; the dark seems to press round so close.' 


it is a long tale of which the end is not known; and there are none now, 
except Elrond, that remember it aright as it was told of old. It is a fair 
tale, though it is sad, as are all the tales of Middle-earth, and yet it may 

speak but to chant softly: 





And in the glade a light was seen 





To music of a pipe unseen, 








There Beren came from mountains cold, 


And where the Elven-river rolled 



And saw in wander flowers of gold 




Enchantment healed his weary feet 



And grasped at moonbeams glistening. 

She tightly fled on dancing feet, 




He heard there oft the flying sound 




In hidden hollows quavering. 



Whispering fell the beechen leaves 



Where leaves of years were thickly strewn, 



Her mantle glinted in the moon, 



She danced, and at her feet was strewn 









And her song released the sudden spring, 




He saw the elven-flowers spring 


Upon the grass untroubling. 




He called her by her elvish name; 




His voice laid on her: Beren came, 




As Beren looked into her eyes 



He saw there mirrored shimmering. 




About him cast her shadowy hair 



O'er stony mountains cold and grey, 

And woods of nightshade morrowless. 



And long ago they passed away 





Strider sighed and paused before he spoke again. ’That is a song,' he 
said, 'in the mode that is called ann-thennath among the Elves, but is hard 

of the meeting of Beren son of Barahir and L®thien Tin®viel. Beren was a 
mortal man, but L®thien was the daughter of Thingol, a King of Elves upon 
Middle-earth when the world was young; and she was the fairest maiden that 

mists of the Northern lands was her loveliness, and in her face was a 
shining light. In those days the Great Enemy, of whom Sauron of Mordor was 
but a servant, dwelt in Angband in the North, and the Elves of the West 

he had stolen; and the fathers of Men aided the Elves. But the Enemy was 
victorious and Barahir was slain, and Beren escaping through great peril 
came over the Mountains of Terror into the hidden Kingdom of Thingol in the 

beside the enchanted river Esgalduin; and he named her Tin®viel, that is 
Nightingale in the language of old. Many sorrows befell them afterwards, and 
they were parted long. Tin®viel rescued Beren from the dungeons of Sauron, 

Enemy from his throne, and took from his iron crown one of the three 
Silmarils, brightest of all jewels, to be the bride-price of L®thien to 
Thingol her father. Yet at the last Beren was slain by the Wolf that came 

chose mortality, and to die from the world, so that she might follow him; 
and it is sung that they met again beyond the Sundering Seas, and after a 
brief time walking alive once more in the green woods, together they passed, 

alone of the Elf-kindred has died indeed and left the world, and they have 
lost her whom they most loved. But from her the lineage of the Elf-lords of 
old descended among Men. There live still those of whom L®thien was the 

Rivendell is of that Kin. For of Beren and L®thien was born Dior Thingol’s 
heir; and of him Elwing the White whom Edrendil wedded, he that sailed his 
ship out of the mists of the world into the seas of heaven with the Silmaril 

Westernesse.' 






in the red glow of the wood-fire. His eyes shone, and his voice was rich and 
deep. Above him was a black starry sky. Suddenly a pale light appeared over 
the crown of Weathertop behind him. The waxing moon was climbing 





The story ended. The hobbits moved and stretched. 'Look!' said Merry. 
'The Moon is rising: it must be getting late.' 


hill something small and dark against the glimmer of the moonrise. It was 
perhaps only a large stone or jutting rock shown up by the pale light. 

Sam and Merry got up and walked away from the fire. Frodo and Pippin 

intently. All seemed quiet and still, but Frodo felt a cold dread creeping 
over his heart, now that Strider was no longer speaking. He huddled closer 
to the fire. At that moment Sam came running back from the edge of the dell. 


durstn't go outside this dell for any money; I felt that something was 


'Did you see anything?' asked Frodo, springing to his feet. 



'I saw something,' said Merry; 'or I thought I did - away westwards 
where the moonlight was falling on the flats beyond the shadow of the 
hill-tops, I thought there were two or three black shapes. They seemed to be 


'Keep close to the fire, with your faces outward!' cried Strider. 'Get 


For a breathless time they sat there, silent and alert, with their 

them. Nothing happened. There was no sound or movement in the night. 


stirred, feeling that he must break the silence: he longed to shout out 


'Hush!' whispered Strider. 'What's that?' gasped Pippin at the same 


Over the lip of the little dell, on the side away from the hill, they 





strained their eyes, and the shadows seemed to grow. Soon there could be no 


three or four tall black figures were standing there on the slope, 
looking down on them. So black were they that they seemed like black holes 

of venomous breath and felt a thin piercing chill. Then the shapes slowly 


Terror overcame Pippin and Merry, and they threw themselves flat on the 
ground. Sam shrank to Frodo's side. Frodo was hardly less terrified than his 
companions; he was quaking as if he was bitter cold, but his terror was 

this laid hold of him, and he could think of nothing else. Fie did not forget 
the Barrow, nor the message of Gandalf; but something seemed to be 

the hope of escape, or of doing anything, either good or bad: he simply felt 
that he must take the Ring and put it on his finger. Fie could not speak. Fie 
felt Sam looking at him, as if he knew that his master was in some great 
trouble, but he could not turn towards him. He shut his eyes and struggled 

out the chain, and slipped the Ring on the forefinger of his left hand. 

Immediately, though everything else remained as before, dim and dark, 

wrappings. There were five tall figures: two standing on the lip of the 
dell, three advancing. In their white faces burned keen and merciless eyes; 
under their mantles were long grey robes; upon their grey hairs were helms 
of silver; in their haggard hands were swords of steel. Their eyes fell on 

sword, and it seemed to him that it flickered red, as if it was a firebrand. 

Two of the figures halted. The third was taller than the others: his hair 
was long and gleaming and on his helm was a crown. In one hand he held a 

it glowed with a pale light. He sprang forward and bore down on Frodo. 

At that moment Frodo threw himself forward on the ground, and he heard 
himself crying aloud: O Elbereth! Gilthoniel! At the same time he struck at 

pain like a dart of poisoned ice pierce his left shoulder. Even as he 
swooned he caught, as through a swirling mist, a glimpse of Strider leaping 




out of the darkness with a flaming brand of wood in either hand. With a last 

closed his right hand tight upon it. 








When Frodo came to himself he was still clutching the Ring desperately. 

He was lying by the fire, which was now piled high and burning brightly. His 

pale king?' he asked wildly. They were too overjoyed to hear him speak to 
answer for a while; nor did they understand his question. At length he 
gathered from Sam that they had seen nothing but the vague shadowy shapes 

vanished; and at that moment a black shadow rushed past him, and he fell. He 
heard Frodo’s voice, but it seemed to come from a great distance, or from 
under the earth, crying out strange words. They saw nothing more, until they 

grass with his sword beneath him. Strider ordered them to pick him up and 
lay him near the fire, and then he disappeared. That was now a good while 


Sam plainly was beginning to have doubts again about Strider; but while 

started, and Sam drew his sword and stood over Frodo; but Strider knelt down 


'I am not a Black Rider, Sam,' he said gently, 'nor in league with 
them. I have been trying to discover something of their movements; but I 
have found nothing. I cannot think why they have gone and do not attack 


When he heard what Frodo had to tell, he became full of concern, and 
shook his head and sighed. Then he ordered Pippin and Merry to heat as much 
water as they could in their small kettles, and to bathe the wound with it. 


walked away, and called Sam to him. 'I think I understand things better 
now,' he said in a low voice. 'There seem only to have been five of the 
enemy. Why they were not all here, I don't know; but I don't think they 

far, I fear. They will come again another night, if we cannot escape. They 
are only waiting, because they think that their purpose is almost 





they believe your master has a deadly wound that will subdue him to their 
will. We shall see!' Sam choked with tears. 'Don't despair!' said Strider. 

'You must trust me now. Your Frodo is made of sterner stuff than I had 
guessed, though Gandalf hinted that it might prove so. He is not slain, and 

expect. I will do all I can to help and heal him. Guard him well, while I am 
away!' He hurried off and disappeared again into the darkness. 


deadly chill was spreading from his shoulder to his arm and side. His 
friends watched over him, warming him, and bathing his wound. The night 
passed slowly and wearily. Dawn was growing in the sky, and the dell was 


'Look!' he cried; and stooping he lifted from the ground a black cloak 
that had lain there hidden by the darkness. A foot above the lower hem there 

that it did to his enemy, I fear; for it is unharmed, but all blades perish 
that pierce that dreadful King. More deadly to him was the name of 


'And more deadly to Frodo was this!' He stooped again and lifted up a 

that near the end its edge was notched and the point was broken off. But 
even as he held it up in the growing light, they gazed in astonishment, for 
the blade seemed to melt, and vanished like a smoke in the air, leaving only 
the hilt in Strider's hand. 'Alas!' he cried. 'It was this accursed knife 

weapons. But I will do what I can.' 


knees, and he sang over it a slow song in a strange tongue. Then setting it 
aside, he turned to Frodo and in a soft tone spoke words the others could 
not catch. From the pouch at his belt he drew out the long leaves of a 



does not grow in the bare hills; but in the thickets away south of the Road 
I found it in the dark by the scent of its leaves.' He crushed a leaf in his 
fingers, and it gave out a sweet and pungent fragrance. 'It is fortunate 

brought to Middle-earth. Athelas they named it, and it grows now sparsely 




and only near places where they dwelt or camped of old; and it is not known 
in the North, except to some of those who wander in the Wild. It has great 


He threw the leaves into boiling water and bathed Frodo's shoulder. The 
fragrance of the steam was refreshing, and those that were unhurt felt their 
minds calmed and cleared. The herb had also some power over the wound, for 
Frodo felt the pain and also the sense of frozen cold lessen in his side; 

hand. He bitterly regretted his foolishness, and reproached himself for 
weakness of will; for he now perceived that in putting on the Ring he obeyed 
not his own desire but the commanding wish of his enemies. He wondered if he 

their journey. He fell too weak to stand. 


leave Weathertop as soon as possible. 'I think now,' said Strider, 'that the 
enemy has been watching this place for some days. If Gandalf ever came here, 
then he must have been forced to ride away, and he will not return. In any 
case we are in great peril here after dark, since the attack of last night, 


As soon as the daylight was full, they had some hurried food and 
packed. It was impossible for Frodo to walk, so they divided the greater 

the last few days the poor beast had improved wonderfully; it already seemed 
fatter and stronger, and had begun to show an affection for its new masters, 
especially for Sam. Bill Ferny's treatment must have been very hard for the 


They started off in a southerly direction. This would mean crossing the 
Road, but. it was the quickest way to more wooded country. And they needed 
fuel; for Strider said that Frodo must be kept warm, especially at night, 

shorten their journey by cutting across another great loop of the Road: east 
beyond Weathertop it changed its course and took a wide bend northwards. 


slopes of the hill, and came in a little while to the edge of the Road. 

There was no sign of the Riders. But even as they were hurrying across they 
heard far away two cries: a cold voice calling and a cold voice answering. 
Trembling they sprang forward, and made for the thickets that lay ahead. The 





bushes and stunted trees grew in dense patches with wide barren spaces in 
between. The grass was scanty, coarse, and grey; and the leaves in the 
thickets were faded and falling. It was a cheerless land, and their journey 

was grieved as he watched them walking beside him with their heads down, 


their backs bowed under their burdens. Even Strider seemed tired and 


Before the first day's march was over Frodo's pain began to grow again, 

ground or the scene changing much, except that behind them Weathertop 


sank, and before them the distant mountains loomed a little nearer. Yet 
since that far cry they had seen and heard no sign that the enemy had marked 
their flight or followed them. They dreaded the dark hours, and kept watch 

grey night, dimly lit by the cloud- veiled moon; but they saw nothing, and 
heard no sound but the sigh of withered leaves and grass. Not once did they 
feel the sense of present evil that had assailed them before the attack in 

trail again. Perhaps they were waiting to make some ambush in a narrow 


At the end of the fifth day the ground began once more to rise slowly 
out of the wide shallow valley into which they had descended. Strider now 

the top of a long slow-climbing slope, and saw far ahead a huddle of wooded 
hills. Away below them they could see the Road sweeping round the feet of 
the hills; and to their right a grey river gleamed pale in the thin 

half-veiled in mist. 


Strider. 'We have now come to the River Hoarwell, that the Elves call 
Mitheithel. It flows down out of the Ettenmoors, the troll-fells north of 

Greyflood after that. It is a great water before it finds the Sea. There is 
no way over it below its sources in the Ettenmoors, except by the Last 






’What is that other river we can see far away there?' asked Merry. 

'That is Loudwater, the Bruinen of Rivendell,' answered Strider. 'The 
Road runs along the edge of the hills for many miles from the Bridge to the 

One river at a time! We shall be fortunate indeed if we do not find the Last 


Next day, early in the morning, they came down again to the borders of 
the Road. Sam and Strider went forward, but they found no sign of any 
travellers or riders. Here under the shadow of the hills there had been some 

all footprints. No horseman had passed since then, as far as he could see. 

They hurried along with all the speed they could make, and after a mile 
or two they saw the Last Bridge ahead, at the bottom of a short steep slope. 

made them take cover in a thicket at the side of the Road, while he went 


Before long he came hurrying back. 'I can see no sign of the enemy,' he 
said, 'and I wonder very much what that means. But I have found something 


He held out his hand, and showed a single pale-green jewel. 'I found it 

elf-stone. Whether it was set there, or let fall by chance, I cannot say; 
but it brings hope to me. I will take it as a sign that we may pass the 
Bridge; but beyond that I dare not keep to the Road, without some clearer 



no sound but the water swirling against its three great arches. A mile 
further on they came to a narrow ravine that led away northwards through the 
steep lands on the left of the Road. Here Strider turned aside, and soon 

sullen hills. 


Road behind them; but this new country seemed threatening and unfriendly. As 
they went forward the hills about them steadily rose. Here and there upon 
heights and ridges they caught glimpses of ancient walls of stone, and the 





time to gaze ahead and to think. He recalled Bilbo's account of his journey 
and the threatening towers on the hills north of the Road, in the country 
near the Troll's wood where his first serious adventure had happened. Frodo 

they would pass near the spot. 


this troll-country?' 



Men once dwelt here, ages ago; but none remain now. They became an evil 
people, as legends tell, for they fell under the shadow of Angmar. But all 
were destroyed in the war that brought the North Kingdom to its end. But 

still lies on the land.' 


forgetful?' asked Peregrin. 'The birds and beasts do not tell tales of that 


'The heirs of Elendil do not forget all things past,' said Strider; 

'and many more things than I can tell are remembered in Rivendell.' 'Have 

there once, and still I return when I may. 

There my heart is; but it is not my fate to sit in peace, even in the 


The hills now began to shut them in. The Road behind held on its way to 

into a long valley; narrow, deeply cloven, dark and silent. Trees with old 
and twisted roots hung over cliffs, and piled up behind into mounting slopes 


The hobbits grew very weary. They advanced slowly, for they had to pick 

rocks. As long as they could they avoided climbing for Frodo's sake, and 
because it was in fact difficult to find any way up out of the narrow dales. 

They had been two days in this country when the weather turned wet. The wind 
began to blow steadily out of the West and pour the water of the distant 

they were all soaked, and their camp was cheerless, for they could not get 
any fire to burn. The next day the hills rose still higher and steeper 






from Weathertop, and their stock of provisions was beginning to run low. It 


That night they camped on a stony shelf with a rock -wall behind them, 
in which there was a shallow cave, a mere scoop in the cliff. Frodo was 

the ache and sense of deadly chill took away all sleep. He lay tossing and 
turning and listening fearfully to the stealthy night-noises: wind in chinks 
of rock, water dripping, a crack, the sudden rattling fall of a loosened 

sat up he saw nothing but the back of Strider sitting hunched up, smoking 
his pipe, and watching. He lay down again and passed into an uneasy dream, 
in which he walked on the grass in his garden in the Shire, but it seemed 

over the hedge. 


were still thick, but they were breaking, and pale strips of blue appeared 
between them. The wind was shifting again. They did not start early. 
Immediately after their cold and comfortless breakfast Strider went off 

came back. He was going to climb up, if he could, and get a look at the lie 


When he returned he was not reassuring. 'We have come too far to the 
north,' he said, 'and we must find some way to turn back southwards again. 

If we keep on as we are going we shall get up into the Ettendales far north 

perhaps find our way through and come round to Rivendell from the north; but 
it would take too long, for I do not know the way, and our food would not 


The rest of that day they spent scrambling over rocky ground. They 
found a passage between two hills that led them into a valley running 
south-east, the direction that they wished to take; but towards the end of 

edge against the sky was broken into many bare points like teeth of a 
blunted saw. They had a choice between going back or climbing over it. 


long Frodo was obliged to dismount and struggle along on foot. Even so they 




often despaired of getting their pony up, or indeed of finding a path for 
themselves, burdened as they were. The light was nearly gone, and they were 
all exhausted, when at last they reached the top. They had climbed on to a 

again, only a short distance ahead. Frodo threw himself down, and lay on the 
ground shivering. His left arm was lifeless, and his side and shoulder felt 
as if icy claws were laid upon them. The trees and rocks about him seemed 



has been too much for Frodo. I am dreadfully anxious about him. What are we 
to do? Do you think they will be able to cure him in Ri vendell, if we ever 


'We shall see,' answered Strider. 'There is nothing more that I can do 
in the wilderness; and it is chiefly because of his wound that I am so 


'What is the matter with my master?' asked Sam in a low voice, looking 
appealingly at Strider. 'His wound was small, and it is already closed. 



'Frodo has been touched by the weapons of the Enemy,' said Strider, 

'and there is some poison or evil at work that is beyond my skill to drive 


Night was cold up on the high ridge. They lit a small fire down under 
the gnarled roots of an old pine, that hung over a shallow pit: it looked as 
if stone had once been quarried there. They sat huddled together. The wind 

and sighing. Frodo lay half in a dream, imagining that endless dark wings 
were sweeping by above him, and that on the wings rode pursuers that sought 


The morning dawned bright and fair; the air was clean, and the light 
pale and clear in a rain- washed sky. Their hearts were encouraged, but (hey 
longed for the sun to warm their cold stiff limbs. As soon as it was light, 

to the east of the pass. The sun had risen and was shining brightly when he 
returned with more comforting news. They were now going more or less in the 
right direction. If they went on, down the further side of the ridge, they 

glimpse of the Loudwater again, and he knew that, though it was hidden from 




view, the Road to the Ford was not far from the River and lay on the side 


'We must make for the Road again,' he said. 'We cannot hope to find a 
path through these hills. Whatever danger may beset it, the Road is our only 



the southern side of the ridge; but the way was much easier than they had 
expected, for the slope was far less steep on this side, and before long 
Frodo was able to ride again. Bill Ferny's poor old pony was developing an 
unexpected talent for picking out a path, and for sparing its rider as many 

better in the morning light, but every now and again a mist seemed to 
obscure his sight, and he passed his hands over his eyes. 


called to them. 'There is a path here!' he cried. 



there were clearly the beginnings of a path, that climbed with many 
windings out of the woods below and faded away on the hill-top behind. In 
places it was now faint and overgrown, or choked with fallen stones and 

by strong arms and heavy feet. Here and there old trees had been cut or 
broken down, and large rocks cloven or heaved aside to make a way. 

They followed the track for some while, for it offered much the easiest 

into the dark woods, and the path grew plainer and broader. Suddenly coming 
out of a belt of fir-trees it ran steeply down a slope, and turned sharply 
to the left round the comer of a rocky shoulder of the hill. When they came 

strip under the face of a low cliff overhung with trees. In the stony wall 
there was a door hanging crookedly ajar upon one great hinge. 


behind, but in the gloom inside nothing could be seen. Strider, Sam, and 
Merry pushing with all their strength managed to open the door a little 
wider, and then Strider and Merry went in. They did not go far, for on the 

except some great empty jars and broken pots. 

'Surely this is a troll-hole, if ever there was one!' said Pippin. 







we had better get off it quick.’ 


certainly a troll-hole, but it seems to have been long forsaken. I don't 
think we need be afraid. But let us go on down warily, and we shall see.' 

The path went on again from the door, and turning to the right again 

to show Strider that he was still afraid, went on ahead with Merry. Sam and 
Strider came behind, one on each side of Frodo's pony, for the path was now 
broad enough for four or five hobbits to walk abreast. But they had not gone 
very far before Pippin came running back, followed by Merry. They both 



far below. We got a sight of them through the tree-trunks. They are very 


'We will come and look at them,' said Strider, picking up a stick. 



The sun was now high, and it shone down through the half-stripped 
branches of the trees, and lit the clearing with bright patches of light. 

They halted suddenly on the edge, and peered through the tree-trunks, 

stooping, and the other two stood staring at him. 

Strider walked forward unconcernedly. 'Get up, old stone!' he said, and 


Nothing happened. There was a gasp of astonishment from the hobbits, 

history! These must be the very three that were caught by Gandalf, 
quarrelling over the right way to cook thirteen dwarves and one hobbit.' 

'I had no idea we were anywhere near the place!' said Pippin. He knew 

he had never more than half believed it. Even now he looked at the stone 
trolls with suspicion, wondering if some magic might not suddenly bring them 


'You are forgetting not only your family history, but all you ever knew 
about trolls,' said Strider. 'It is broad daylight with a bright sun, and 





us in this glade! In any case you might have noticed that one of them has an 
old bird's nest behind his ear. That would be a most unusual ornament for a 


They all laughed. Frodo felt his spirits reviving: the reminder of 

and comforting, and the mist before his eyes seemed to be lifting a little. 
They rested for some time in the glade, and took their mid-day meal right 


'Won't somebody give us a bit of a song, while the sun is high?' said 
Merry, when they had finished. 'We haven't had a song or a tale for days.' 

'Not since Weathertop,' said Frodo. The others looked at him. 'Don't 

sing. Perhaps Sam could dig something out of his memory.' 

'Come on, Sam!' said Merry. 'There's more stored in your head than you 


'I don't know about that,' said Sam. 'But how would this suit? It ain't 

these old images here brought it to my mind.' Standing up, with his hands 
behind his back, as if he was at school, he began to sing to an old tune. 



And munched and mumbled a bare old bone; 





Done by! Gum by! 





Up came Tom with his big boots on. 



For it looks like the shin o' my nuncle Tim, 





This many a year has Tim been gone, 





'My lad, ' said Troll, 'this bone I stole. 







Afore I found his shinbone. 





For he don't need his shinbone. ' 


Without axin ' leave should go makin 'free 









'For a couple o' pins,' says Troll, and grins, 


A bit o' fresh meal will go down sweet! 







I've a mind to dine on thee now. ' 


He found his hands had hold of naught. 


And gave him the boot to lam him. 









As well set your boot to the mountain's root, 




Old Troll laughed, when he heard Tom groan, 





Tom's leg is game, since home he came, 



But Troll don't care, and he's still there 





Troll's old seat is still the same, 



'Well, that's a warning to us all!' laughed Merry. 'It is as well you 


'Where did you come by that, Sam?' asked Pippin. 'I've never heard 


Sam muttered something inaudible. 'It's out of his own head, of 

First he was a conspirator, now he's a jester. He'll end up by becoming a 


'I hope not,' said Sam. 'I don't want to be neither!' 

In the afternoon they went on down the woods. They were probably 

years before. After a few miles they came out on the top of a high bank 
above the Road. At this point the Road had left the Hoarwell far behind in 
its narrow valley, and now clung close to the feet of the hills, rolling and 

and 


grass. On it roughly cut and now much weathered could still be seen 


'There!' said Merry. 'That must be the stone that marked the place 
where the trolls' gold was hidden. How much is left of Bilbo's share, I 


Frodo looked at the stone, and wished that Bilbo had brought home no 


'Bilbo gave it all away. He told me he did not feel it was really his, as it 


The Road lay quiet under the long shadows of early evening. There was 
no sign of any other travellers to be seen. As there was now no other 






the light of the fast westering sun. A cold wind flowed down to meet them 


They were beginning to look out for a place off the Road, where they 
could camp for the night, when they heard a sound that brought sudden fear 
back into their hearts: the noise of hoofs behind them. They looked back, 

Road. As quickly as they could they scrambled off the beaten way and up into 
the deep heather and bilberry brushwood on the slopes above, until they came 
to a small patch of thick-growing hazels. As they peered out from among the 

thirty feel below them. The sound of hoofs drew nearer. They were going 
fast, with a light clippety-clippely-clip. Then faintly, as if it was blown 
away from them by the breeze, they seemed to catch a dim ringing, as of 


That does not sound like a Black Rider's horse!' said Frodo, listening 

remained full of suspicion. They had been in fear of pursuit for so long 
that any sound from behind seemed ominous and unfriendly. But Strider was 
now leaning forward, stooped to the ground, with a hand to his ear, and a 


The light faded, and the leaves on the bushes rustled softly. Clearer 

feet. Suddenly into view below came a white horse, gleaming in the shadows, 
running swiftly. In the dusk its headstall flickered and flashed, as if it 
were studded with gems like living stars. The rider's cloak streamed behind 

wind of his speed. To Frodo it appeared that a white light was shining 
through the form and raiment of the rider, as if through a thin veil. 

Strider sprang from hiding and dashed down towards the Road, leaping 

rider had reined in his horse and halted, looking up towards the thicket 
where they stood. When he saw Strider, he dismounted and ran to meet him 

ringing 


others that dwelt in the wide world had voices so fair to hear. But there 




seemed to be a note of haste or fear in his call, and they saw that he was 


Soon Strider beckoned to them, and the hobbits left the bushes and 
hurried down to the Road. 'This is Glorfindel, who dwells in the house of 


'Hail, and well met at last!' said the Elf-lord to Frodo. 'I was sent 
from Rivendell to look for you. We feared that you were in danger upon the 




'No. He had not when I departed; but that was nine days ago,' answered 
Glorfindel. 'Elrond received news that troubled him. Some of my kindred, 

amiss, and sent messages as swiftly as they could. They said that the Nine 
were abroad, and that you were astray bearing a great burden without 
guidance, for Gandalf had not returned. There are few even in Rivendell that 

north, west, and south. It was thought that you might turn far aside to 
avoid pursuit, and become lost in the Wilderness. 


Mitheithel, and left a token there, nigh on seven days ago. Three of the 
servants of Sauron were upon the Bridge, but they withdrew and I pursued 
them westward. I came also upon two others, but they turned away southward. 

followed it over the Bridge; and today I marked where you descended from the 
hills again. But come! There is no time for further news. Since you are here 
we must risk the peril of the Road and go. There are five behind us, and 

wind. And they are not all. Where the other four may be, I do not know. I 
fear that we may find the Ford is already held against us.' 


felt a great weariness come over him. Ever since the sun began to sink the 
mist before his eyes had darkened, and he felt that a shadow was coming 
between him and the faces of his friends. Now pain assailed him, and he felt 


'My master is sick and wounded,' said Sam angrily. 'He can't go on 


Glorfindel caught Frodo as he sank to the ground, and taking him gently 






Briefly Strider told of the attack on their camp under Weathertop, and 
of the deadly knife. He drew out the hilt, which he had kept, and handed it 
to the Elf. Glorfindel shuddered as he took it, but he looked intently at 



your eyes cannot see them. Keep it, Aragorn, till we reach the house of 
Elrond! But be wary, and handle it as little as you may! Alas! the wounds of 
this weapon are beyond my skill to heal. I will do what I can - but all the 


He searched the wound on Frodo's shoulder with his fingers, and his 
face grew graver, as if what he learned disquieted him. But Frodo felt the 

shoulder to his hand, and the pain grew easier. The dusk of evening seemed 
to grow lighter about him, as if a cloud had been withdrawn. He saw his 
friends' faces more clearly again, and a measure of new hope and strength 



stirrups up to the saddle-skins, and you must sit as tight as you can. But 
you need not fear: my horse will not let any rider fall that I command him 
to bear. His pace is light and smooth; and if danger presses too near, he 

cannot rival.' 


carried off to Rivendell or anywhere else, leaving my friends behind in 


Glorfindel smiled. 'I doubt very much,' he said, 'if your friends would 
be in danger if you were not with them! The pursuit would follow you and 

brings us all in peril.' 


white horse. The pony was laden instead with a great part of the others' 
burdens, so that they now marched lighter, and for a time made good speed; 
but the hobbits began to find it hard to keep up with the swift tireless 

under the deep clouded night. There was neither star nor moon. Not until the 
grey of dawn did he allow them to halt. Pippin, Merry, and Sam were by that 




time nearly asleep on their stumbling legs; and even Strider seemed by the 


They cast themselves down in the heather a few yards from the 
road-side, and fell asleep immediately. They seemed hardly to have closed 
their eyes when Glorfindel, who had set himself to watch while they slept, 

clouds and mists of the night were gone. 


little liquor from his silver-studded flask of leather. It was clear as 
spring water and had no taste, and it did not feel either cool or warm in 
the mouth; but strength and vigour seemed to flow into all their limbs as 

(which was now all that they had left) seemed to satisfy their hunger better 
than many a good breakfast in the Shire had done. 


again. Glorfindel still urged them on, and only allowed two brief halts 
during the day's march. In this way they covered almost twenty miles before 
nightfall, and came to a point where the Road bent right and ran down 

far there had been no sign or sound of pursuit that the hobbits could see or 
hear; but often Glorfindel would halt and listen for a moment, if they 
lagged behind, and a look of anxiety clouded his face. Once or twice he 


But however anxious their guides might be, it was plain that the 

weariness, and unable to think of anything but their feet and legs. Frodo's 
pain had redoubled, and during the day things about him faded to shadows of 
ghostly grey. He almost welcomed the coming of night, for then the world 


The hobbits were still weary, when they set out again early next 



hobbled forward at the best pace they could manage. 

'Our peril will be greatest just ere we reach the river,' said 

and other danger may be waiting by the Ford.' 

The Road was still running steadily downhill, and there was now in 





could, to ease their tired feet. In the late afternoon they came to a place 
where the Road went suddenly under the dark shadow of tall pine-trees, and 
then plunged into a deep cutting with steep moist walls of red stone. Echoes 

footfalls following their own. All at once, as if through a gate of light, 
the Road ran out again from the end of the tunnel into the open. There at 
the bottom of a sharp incline they saw before them a long flat mile, and 

bank, threaded by a winding path; and behind that the tall mountains 
climbed, shoulder above shoulder, and peak beyond peak, into the fading sky. 

There was still an echo as of following feet in the cutting behind 

branches of the pines. One moment Glorfindel turned and listened, then he 


'Fly!' he called. 'Fly! The enemy is upon us!’ 

The white horse leaped forward. The hobbits ran down the slope. 

across the flat, when suddenly there was a noise of horses galloping. Out of 
the gate in the trees that they had just left rode a Black Rider. He reined 
his horse in, and halted, swaying in his saddle. Another followed him, and 




He did not obey at once, for a strange reluctance seized him. Checking 
the horse to a walk, he turned and looked back. The Riders seemed to sit 
upon their great steeds like threatening statues upon a hill, dark and 

Suddenly he knew in his heart that they were silently commanding him to 
wait. Then at once fear and hatred awoke in him. His hand left the bridle 
and gripped the hilt of his sword, and with a red flash he drew it. 


to the horse in the elf-tongue: noro lim, noro lim, Asfaloth! 

At once the white horse sprang away and sped like the wind along the 

hill in pursuit, and from the Riders came a terrible cry, such as Frodo had 
heard filling the woods with horror in the Eastfarthing far away. It was 
answered; and to the dismay of Frodo and his friends out from the trees and 





Frodo: two galloped madly towards the Ford to cut off his escape. They 
seemed to him to run like the wind and to grow swiftly larger and darker, as 


Frodo looked back for a moment over his shoulder. He could no longer 
see his friends. The Riders behind were falling back: even their great 

looked forward again, and hope faded. There seemed no chance of reaching the 
Ford before he was cut off by the others that had lain in ambush. He could 
see them clearly now: they appeared to have cast aside their hoods and black 
cloaks, and they were robed in white and grey. Swords were naked in their 

called to him with fell voices. 


cry came from him. He shut his eyes and clung to the horse's mane. The wind 
whistled in his ears, and the bells upon the harness rang wild and shrill. A 
breath of deadly cold pierced him like a spear, as with a last spurt, like a 

before the face of the foremost Rider. 

Frodo heard the splash of water. It foamed about his feet. He felt the 

path. He was climbing the steep bank. He was across the Ford. 

But the pursuers were close behind. At the top of the bank the horse 

water's edge below, and Frodo's spirit quailed before the threat of their 
uplifted faces. He knew of nothing that would prevent them from crossing as 
easily as he had done; and he felt that it was useless to try to escape over 

Riders crossed. In any case he felt that he was commanded urgently to halt. 
Hatred again stirred in him, but he had no longer the strength to refuse. 

Suddenly the foremost Rider spurred his horse forward. It checked at 

brandished his sword. 


more! ' His voice sounded thin and shrill in his own ears. The Riders 
halted, but Frodo had not the power of Bombadil. His enemies laughed at him 
with a harsh and chilling laughter. 'Come back! Come back!' they called. 'To 








The Ring! The Ring!' they cried with deadly voices; and immediately 
their leader urged his horse forward into the water, followed closely by two 



lifting up his sword, 'you shall have neither the Ring nor me!' 

Then the leader, who was now half across the Ford, stood up menacing in 
his stirrups, and raised up his hand. Frodo was stricken dumb. He felt his 

fell out of his shaking hand. The elf-horse reared and snorted. The foremost 
of the black horses had almost set foot upon the shore. 


waters rolling many stones. Dimly Frodo saw the river below him rise, and 
down along its course there came a plumed cavalry of waves. White flames 
seemed to Frodo to flicker on their crests and he half fancied that he saw 

Riders that were still in the midst of the Ford were overwhelmed: they 
disappeared, buried suddenly under angry foam. Those that were behind drew 


With his last failing senses Frodo heard cries, and it seemed to him 
that he saw, beyond the Riders that hesitated on the shore, a shining figure 

flared red in the grey mist that was falling over the world. 

The black horses were filled with madness, and leaping forward in 

were drowned in the roaring of the river as it carried them away. Then Frodo 
felt himself falling, and the roaring and confusion seemed to rise and 
engulf him together with his enemies. He heard and saw no more. 










Frodo woke and found himself lying in bed. At first he thought that he 
had slept late, after a long unpleasant dream that still hovered on the edge 

was flat, and it had dark beams richly carved. He lay a little while longer 
looking at patches of sunlight on the wall, and listening to the sound of a 


'Where am I, and what is the time?' he said aloud to the ceiling. 'In 


'It is the morning of October the twenty -fourth, if you want to know.' 

'Gandalf!' cried Frodo, sitting up. There was the old wizard, sitting 


'Yes,' he said, 'I am here. And you are lucky to be here, too, after 
all the absurd things you have done since you left home.' Frodo lay down 

not think he would get the better of an argument. He was fully awake now, 
and the memory of his journey was returning: the disastrous 'short cut' 
through the Old Forest the 'accident' at The Prancing Pony ; and his madness 

of all these things and trying in vain to bring his memory down to his 
arriving in Rivendell, there was a long silence, broken only by the soft 
puffs of Gandalf s pipe, as he blew white smoke -rings out of the window. 



'Yes, they are all safe and sound,' answered Gandalf. 'Sam was here 
until I sent him off to get some rest, about half an hour ago.' 


and it still does.’ 


wound was overcoming you at last. A few more hours and you would have 


beyond our aid. But you have some strength in you, my dear hobbit! As you 
showed in the Barrow. That was touch and go: perhaps the most dangerous 






'You seem to know a great deal already,' said Frodo. 'I have not spoken 
to the others about the Barrow. At first it was too horrible; and afterwards 
there were other things to think about. How do you know about it?' 


it has not been hard for me to read your mind and memory. Do not worry! 
Though I said "absurd" just now, I did not mean it. I think well of you-and 

dangers, still bearing the Ring.' 

'We should never have done it without Strider,' said Frodo. 'But we 


'I was delayed,' said Gandalf, 'and that nearly proved our ruin. And 


'I wish you would tell me what happened!' 


today, by Elrond's orders.' 


tiring,’ said Frodo. ’I am wide awake now, and I remember so many things 
that want explaining. Why were you delayed? You ought to tell me that at 


'You will soon hear all you wish to know,' said Gandalf. 'We shall have 
a Council, as soon as you are well enough. At the moment I will only say 




'Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey,' said the wizard solemnly. 'There are many 

Against some I have not yet been measured. But my time is coming. The 
Morgul-lord and his Black Riders have come forth. War is preparing!' 

'Then you knew of the Riders already -before I met them?’ 


Riders are the Ringwraiths, the Nine Servants of the Lord of the Rings. But 
I did not know that they had arisen again or I should have fled with you at 
once. I heard news of them only after I left you in June; but that story 


'Yes,' said Frodo, 'it was Strider that saved us. Yet I was afraid of 
him at first. Sam never quite trusted him. I think, not at any rate until we 





Gandalf smiled. V I have heard all about Sam,' he said. 'He has no more 


'I am glad,' said Frodo. 'For I have become very fond of Strider. Well, 

and grim at times. In fact, he reminds me often of you. I didn't know that 
any of the Big People were like that. I thought, well, that they were just 
big, and rather stupid: kind and stupid like Butterbur; or stupid and wicked 

perhaps the Breelanders.' 


stupid,' said Gandalf. 'He is wise enough on his own ground. He thinks less 
than he talks, and slower; yet he can see through a brick wall in time (as 
they say in Bree). But there are few left in Middle-earth like Aragorn son 

may be that this War of the Ring will be their last adventure.' 

'Do you really mean that Strider is one of the people of the old 
Kings?' said Frodo in wonder. 'I thought they had all vanished long ago. I 


'Only a Ranger!' cried Gandalf. 'My dear Frodo, that is just what the 

the West. They have helped me before; and I shall need their help in the 
days to come; for we have reached Rivendell, but the Ring is not yet at 


'I suppose not,' said Frodo. 'But so far my only thought has been to 

just to rest. I have had a month of exile and adventure, and I find that has 


He fell silent and shut his eyes. After a while he spoke again. 'I have 
been reckoning,' he said, 'and I can't bring the total up to October the 
twenty-fourth. It ought to be the twenty-first. We must have reached the 


'You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you,' said Gandalf. 


’I don't know.' Frodo answered. 'They don't feel at all: which is an 
improvement, but'— he made an effort— 'I can move my arm again a little. 

hand with his right. 





again. Elrond has cured you: he has tended you for days, ever since you were 




'Well, four nights and three days, to be exact. The Elves brought you 
from this where you lost count. We have been terribly anxious, and Sam has 
hardly left your side, day or night, except to run messages. Elrond is a 

truth, I had very little hope; for I suspected that there was some fragment 
of the blade still in the closed wound. But it could not be found until last 
night. Then Elrond removed a splinter. It was deeply buried, and it was 


Frodo shuddered, remembering the cruel knife with notched blade that 

gone now. It has been melted. And it seems that Hobbits fade very 
reluctantly. I have known strong warriors of the Big People who would 

days.’ 




'They tried to pierce your heart with a Morgul-knife which remains in 
the wound. If they had succeeded, you would have become like they are, only 
weaker and under their command. You would have became a wraith under 



keep his Ring, if any greater torment were possible than being robbed of it 
and seeing it on his hand.' 


faintly. I was mortally afraid, of course; but if I had known more, I should 
not have dared even to move. It is a marvel that I escaped!' 


courage. For your heart was not touched, and only your shoulder was pierced; 
and that was because you resisted to the last. But it was a terribly narrow 
shave, so to speak. You were in gravest peril while you wore the Ring, for 

you. You could see them, and they could see you.’ 

'I know,' said Frodo. 'They were terrible to behold! But why could we 






'Because they are real horses; just as the black robes are real robes 

with the living.' 


are terrified when they draw near, even the elf-horse of Glorfindel. The 
dogs howl and the geese scream at them.’ 


in Mordor. Not all his servants and chattels are wraiths! There are ores and 
trolls, there are wargs and werewolves; and there have been and still are 
many Men, warriors and kings, that walk alive under the Sun, and yet are 


'What about Rivendell and the Elves? Is Rivendell safe?’ 


Dark Lord, and they may fly before him, but never again will they listen to 
him or serve him. And here in Rivendell there live still some of his chief 
foes: the Elven-wise, lords of the Eldar from beyond the furthest seas. They 

live at once in both worlds, and against both the Seen and the Unseen they 


'I thought that I saw a white figure that shone and did not grow dim 
like the others. Was that Glorfindel then?' 


mighty of the Firstborn. Lie is an Elf-lord of a house of princes. Indeed 
there is a power in Rivendell to withstand the might of Mordor, for a while: 
and elsewhere other powers still dwell. There is power, too, of another kind 

things go on as they are going. The Dark Lord is putting forth all his 


'Still,' he said, standing suddenly up and sticking out his chin, while 
his beard went stiff and straight like bristling wire, 'we must keep up our 

Rivendell, and you need not worry about anything for the present.' 

'I haven't any courage to keep up,' said Frodo, 'but I am not worried 
at the moment. Just give me news of my friends, and tell me the end of the 

present. After that I shall have another sleep, I think; but I shan't be 




able to close my eyes until you have finished the story for me.' 

Gandalf moved his chair to the bedside, and took a good look at Frodo. 


awake and aware. He was smiling, and there seemed to be little wrong with 
him. But to the wizard's eye there was a faint change just a hint as it were 
of transparency, about him, and especially about the left hand that lay 


'Still that must be expected,' said Gandalf to himself. 'He is not half 

foretell. Not to evil, I think. He may become like a glass filled with a 


'You look splendid,' he said aloud. 'I will risk a brief tale without 
consulting Elrond. But quite brief, mind you, and then you must sleep again. 
This is what happened, as far as I can gather. The Riders made straight for 

longer: you had become visible to them, being already on the threshold of 
their world. And also the Ring drew them. Your friends sprang aside, off the 
road, or they would have been ridden down. They knew that nothing could save 
you, if the white horse could not. The Riders were too swift to overtake, 

not with stand all the Nine at once. 


the Ford there is a small hollow beside the road masked by a few stunted 
trees. There they hastily kindled fire; for Glorfindel knew that a flood 
would come down, if the Riders tried to cross, and then he would have to 

appeared, he rushed out, followed by Aragorn and the. others with flaming 
brands. Caught between fire and water, and seeing an Elf-lord revealed in 
his wrath, they were dismayed, and their horses were stricken with madness. 

now hurled into the water by their horses and overwhelmed.' 

'And is that the end of the Black Riders?' asked Frodo. 


they are crippled. But the Ringwraiths themselves cannot be so easily 
destroyed. However, there is nothing more to fear from them at present. Your 
friends crossed after the flood had passed; and they found you lying on your 





standing guard beside you. You were pale and cold, and they feared that you 
were dead, or worse. Elrond's folk met them, carrying you slowly towards 




'Elrond commanded it,' answered Gandalf. 'The river of this valley is 
under his power, and it will rise in anger when he has great need to bar the 
Ford. As soon as the captain of the Ringwraiths rode into the water the 

may not have noticed, but some of the waves took the form of great white 
horses with shining white riders; and there were many rolling and grinding 
boulders. For a moment I was afraid that we had let loose too fierce a 

great vigour in the waters that come down from the snows of the Misty 


'Yes, it all comes back to me now,’ said Frodo: 'the tremendous 
roaring. I thought I was drowning, with my friends and enemies and all. But 


Gandalf looked quickly at Frodo, but he had shut his eyes. 'Yes, you 

celebrate the victory at the Ford of Bruinen, and you will all be there in 


'Splendid!' said Frodo. 'It is wonderful that Elrond, and Glorfindel 
and such great lords, not to mention Strider, should take so much trouble 


'Well, there are many reasons why they should,’ said Gandalf, smiling. 

'I am one good reason. The Ring is another: you are the Ring-bearer. And you 


'Dear Bilbo!’ said Frodo sleepily. 'I wonder where he is. I wish he was 
here and could hear all about it. It would have made him laugh, The cow 



Frodo was now safe in the Fast Homely House east of the Sea. That house 
was, as Bilbo had long ago reported, 'a perfect house, whether you like food 
or sleep, or story-telling or singing, or just sitting and thinking best, or 

weariness, fear, and sadness. 






longer felt in need of rest or sleep, but had a mind for food and drink, and 
probably for singing and story-telling afterwards. He got out of bed and 
discovered that his arm was already nearly as useful again as it ever had 

excellently. Looking in a mirror he was startled to see a much thinner 
reflection of himself than he remembered: it looked remarkably like the 
young nephew of Bilbo who used to go tramping with his uncle in the Shire; 


'Yes, you have seen a thing or two since you last peeped out of a 
looking-glass,' he said to his reflection. 'But now for a merry meeting!' 



At that moment there was a knock on the door, and Sam came in. He ran 
to Frodo and took his left hand, awkwardly and shyly. He stroked it gently 




'It's warm!' said Sam. 'Meaning your hand, Mr. Frodo. It has felt so 
cold through the long nights. But glory and trumpets!’ he cried, turning 
round again with shining eyes and dancing on the floor. ’It's fine to see 

ready to come down, and I thought he was joking.' 


party!' 


very peculiar. Always a bit more to discover, and no knowing what you'll 
find round a corner. And Elves, sir! Elves here, and Elves there! Some like 
kings, terrible and splendid; and some as merry as children. And the music 

since we got here. But I'm getting to know some of the ways of the place.' 

'I know what you have been doing, Sam,' said Frodo, taking his arm. 
'But you shall be merry tonight, and listen to your heart's content. Come 


Sam led him along several passages and down many steps and out into a 

in a porch on the side of the house looking east. Shadows had fallen in the 
valley below, but there was still a light on the faces of the mountains far 
above. The air was warm. The sound of running and falling water was loud, 





summer still lingered in Elrond's gardens. 

'Hurray!' cried Pippin, springing up. 'Here is our noble cousin! Make 


'Hush!' said Gandalf from the shadows at the back of the porch. 'Evil 

them. The Lord of the Ring is not Frodo, but the master of the Dark Tower of 
Mordor, whose power is again stretching out over the world! We are sitting 


'Gandalf has been saying many cheerful things like that,’ said Pippin. 

'He thinks I need keeping in order. But it seems impossible, somehow, to 
feel gloomy or depressed in this place. I feel I could sing, if I knew the 


'I feel like singing myself,' laughed Frodo. 'Though at the moment I 


'That will soon be cured,’ said Pippin. 'You have shown your usual 


'More than meal! A feast!’ said Merry. 'As soon as Gandalf reported 
that you were recovered, the preparations began.’ He had hardly finished 
speaking when they were summoned to the hall by the ringing of many bells. 


part, though there were a few guests of other sorts. Elrond, as was his 
custom, sat in a great chair at the end of the long table upon the dais; and 
next to him on the one side sat Glorfindel, on the other side sat Gandalf. 


whom so many tales spoke; and as they sat upon his right hand and his left, 
Glorfindel, and even Gandalf, whom he thought he knew so well, were 


as lords of dignity and power. Gandalf was shorter in stature than the other 

shoulders, made him look like some wise king of ancient legend. In his aged 
face under great snowy brows his dark eyes were set like coals that could 


Glorfindel was tall and straight; his hair was of shining gold, his 
face fair and young and fearless and full of joy; his eyes were bright and 



The face of Elrond was ageless, neither old nor young, though in it was 




written the memory of many things both glad and sorrowful. His hair was dark 
as the shadows of twilight, and upon it was set a circlet of silver; his 
eyes were grey as a clear evening, and in them was a light like the light of 

as a tried warrior in the fulness of his strength. He was the Lord of 
Rivendell and mighty among both Elves and Men. 


there was a chair under a canopy, and there sat a lady fair to look upon, 
and so like was she in form of womanhood to Elrond that Frodo guessed that 

of her dark hair were touched by no frost, her white arms and clear face 
were flawless and smooth, and the light of stars was in her bright eyes, 
grey as a cloudless night; yet queenly she looked, and thought and knowledge 

bring. Above her brow her head was covered with a cap of silver lace netted 
with small gems, glittering white; but her soft grey raiment had no ornament 


So it was that Frodo saw her whom few mortals had yet seen; Arwen, 
daughter of Elrond, in whom it was said that the likeness of L®thien had 
come on earth again; and she was called Undumiel, for she was the Evenstar 

beyond the mountains, and was but lately returned to Rivendell to her 
father's house. But her brothers, Elladan and Elrohir, were out upon 
errantry: for they rode often far afield with the Rangers of the North, 


Such loveliness in living thing Frodo had never seen before nor 
imagined in his mind; and he was both surprised and abashed to find that he 

he had a suitable chair, and was raised upon several cushions, he felt very 
small, and rather out of place; but that feeling quickly passed. The feast 
was merry and the food all that his hunger could desire. It was some time 


He looked first for his friends. Sam had begged to be allowed to wait 
on his master, but had been told that for this time he was a guest of 
honour. Frodo could see him now, sitting with Pippin and Merry at the upper 






Next to Frodo on his right sat a dwarf of important appearance, richly 
dressed. His beard, very long and forked, was white, nearly as white as the 
snow-white cloth of his garments. He wore a silver belt, and round his neck 


'Welcome and well met!' said the dwarf, turning towards him. Then he 
actually rose from his seat and bowed. 'Gluin at your service,' he said, and 


'Frodo Baggins at your service and your family's,' said Frodo 
correctly, rising in surprise and scattering his cushions. 'Am I right in 

Thorin Oaken shield?' 


courteously assisting Frodo back into his seat. 'And I do not ask, for I 
have already been told that you are the kinsman and adopted heir of our 


'Thank you very much,’ said Frodo. 

'You have had some very strange adventures, I hear,' said Gluin. 'I 

it has happened since Bilbo came with us. But perhaps I should not inquire 
too closely, since Elrond and Gandalf do not seem disposed to talk of this?' 

'I think we will not speak of it, at least not yet,' said Frodo 



one for casual talk; and in any case he wished to forget his troubles for a 
time. 'But I am equally curious,' he added, 'to learn what brings so 


Gluin looked at him. 'If you have not heard, I think we will not speak 
yet of that either. Master Elrond will summon us all ere long, I believe, 
and then we shall all hear many things. But there is much else that may be 



listened more than he spoke; for the news of the Shire, apart from the Ring, 
seemed small and far-away and unimportant, while Gluin had much to tell of 
events in the northern regions of Wilderland. Frodo learned that Grimbeorn 

land between the Mountains and Mirkwood neither ore nor wolf dared to go. 

'Indeed,' said Gluin, 'if it were not for the Beornings, the passage 




from Dale to Rivendell would long ago have become impossible. They are 

tolls are high,' he added with a shake of his head; 'and like Beorn of old 
they are not over fond of dwarves. Still, they are trusty, and that is much 
in these days. Nowhere are there any men so friendly to us as the Men of 

rules them, Brand son of Bain son of Bard. He is a strong king, and his 
realm now reaches far south and east of Esgaroth.' 



'There is much to tell, good and bad,' said Gluin; 'yet it is mostly 
good: we have so far been fortunate, though we do not escape the shadow of 

gladly. But stop me when you are weary! Dwarves' tongues run on when 


And with that Gluin embarked on a long account of the doings of the 
Dwarf-kingdom. He was delighted to have found so polite a listener; for 
Frodo showed no sign of weariness and made no attempt to change the subject, 

and places that he had never heard of before. He was interested, however, to 
hear that Dbin was still King under the Mountain, and was now old (having 
passed his two hundred and fiftieth year), venerable, and fabulously rich. 


still with him: Dwalin, Gluin, Dori, Nori, Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur. Bombur 
was now so fat that he could not move himself from his couch to his chair at 


'And what has become of Balin and Ori and Uin?' asked Frodo. 

A shadow passed over Gluin's face. 'We do not know,' he answered. 'It 
is largely on account of Balin that I have come to ask the advice of those 


Gluin began then to talk of the works of his people, telling Frodo 
about their great labours in Dale and under the Mountain. 'We have done 

whose, secrets are lost. We make good armour and keen swords, but we cannot 
again make mail or blade to match those that were made before the dragon 
came. Only in mining and building have we surpassed the old days. You should 

should see the stone-paved roads of many colours! And the halls and 




cavernous streets under the earth with arches carved like trees; and the 
terraces and towers upon the Mountain’s sides! Then you would see that we 


'I will come and see them, if ever I can,' said Frodo. 'How surprised 


Gluin looked at Frodo and smiled. 'You were very fond of Bilbo were you 


'Yes,' answered Frodo. 1 would rather see him than all the towers and 


At length the feast came to an end. Elrond and Arwen rose and went down 
the hall, and the company followed them in due order. The doors were thrown 
open, and they went across a wide passage and through other doors, and came 

a great hearth between the carven pillars upon either side. 

Frodo found himself walking with Gandalf. 'This is the Hall of Fire' 

awake. But except on high days it usually stands empty and quiet, and people 
come here who wish for peace, and thought. There is always a fire here, all 


As Elrond entered and went towards the seat prepared for him, elvish 
minstrels began to make sweet music. Slowly the hall filled, and Frodo 
looked with delight upon the many fair faces that were gathered together; 

he noticed, not far from the further end of the fire, a small dark figure 
seated on a stool with his back propped against a pillar. Beside him on the 
ground was a drinking-cup and some bread. Frodo wondered whether he was 



feast. His head seemed sunk in sleep on his breast, and a fold of his dark 
cloak was drawn over his face. 


master, he said, with a smile. Then, turning to Frodo, he beckoned to him. 
'Now at last the hour has come that you have wished for, Frodo,' he said. 


The dark figure raised its head and uncovered its face. 

'Bilbo!' cried Frodo with sudden recognition, and he sprang forward. 






hoped you would manage it. Well, well! So all this feasting is in your 


'Why weren't you there?' cried Frodo. 'And why haven't I been allowed 


'Because you were asleep. I have seen a good deal of you. I have sat by 
your side with Sam each day. But as for the feast' I don't go in for such 


'What were you doing?’ 


the best place to do it in, as a rule. Wake up, indeed!’ he said, cocking an 
eye at Elrond. There was a bright twinkle in it and no sign of sleepiness 
that Frodo could see. 'Wake up! I was not asleep. Master Elrond. If you want 

disturbed me-in the middle of making up a song. I was stuck over a line or 
two, and was thinking about them; but now I don't suppose I shall ever get 
them right. There will be such a deal of singing that the ideas will be 

help me. Where is he?' 


into a corner and finish your task, and we will hear it and judge it before 
we end our merrymaking.' Messengers were sent to find Bilbo's friend, though 
none knew where he was, or why he had not been present at the feast. 


and placed himself near them. They talked together in soft voices, oblivious 
of the mirth and music in the hall about them. Bilbo had not much to say of 
himself. When he had left Hobbiton he had wandered off aimlessly, along the 

time towards Ri vendell. 'I got here without much adventure,' he said, 'and 
after a rest I went on with the dwarves to Dale: my last journey. I shan't 
travel again. Old Balin had gone away. Then I came back here, and here I 

And, of course, I make up a few songs. They sing them occasionally: just to 
please me, I think; for, of course, they aren't really good enough for 
Rivendell. And I listen and I think. Time doesn't seem to pass here: it just 


'I hear all kinds of news, from over the Mountains, and out of the 






he has become closer than ever these last few years. The D®nadan has told me 
more. Fancy that ring of mine causing such a disturbance! It is a pity that 
Gandalf did not find out more sooner. I could have brought the thing here 

going back to Hobbiton for it; but I am getting old, and they would not let 
me: Gandalf and Elrond, I mean. They seemed to think that the Enemy was 
looking high and low for me, and would make mincemeat of me, if he caught 




'And Gandalf said: "The Ring has passed on, Bilbo. It would do no good 

remark, just like Gandalf. But he said he was looking after you, so I let 
things be. I am frightfully glad to see you safe and sound.' He paused and 


'Have you got it here?' he asked in a whisper. I can't help feeling 
curious, you know, after all I've heard. I should very much like just to 


'Yes, I've got it,' answered Frodo, feeling a strange reluctance. 'It 


'Well, I should just like to see it for a moment,' said Bilbo. 


hung about his neck on a new chain, light but strong. Slowly he drew it out. 
Bilbo put out his hand. But Frodo quickly drew back the Ring. To his 
distress and amazement he found that he was no longer looking at Bilbo; a 

eyeing a little wrinkled creature with a hungry face and bony groping hands. 


The music and singing round them seemed to falter and a silence fell. 
Bilbo looked quickly at Frodo's face and passed his hand across his eyes. 'I 
understand now,' he said. 'Put it away! I am sorry: sorry you have come in 


I suppose not. Someone else always has to carry on the story. Well, it can't 
be helped. I wonder if it's any good trying to finish my book? But don't 
let's worry about it now-let's have some real News! Tell me all about the 


Frodo hid the Ring away, and the shadow passed leaving hardly a shred 





smiled and laughed happily. Every item of news from the Shire that Frodo 
could tell-aided and corrected now and again by Sam-was of the greatest 
interest to him, from the felling of the least tree to the pranks of the 

Farthings that they did not notice the arrival of a man clad in dark green 
cloth. For many minutes he stood looking down at them with a smile. 






'Well, Strider is one that I haven't heard before, anyway,' said Bilbo. 



'They call me that in Bree,’ said Strider laughing, 'and that is how I 


'And why do you call him D®nadan?’ asked Frodo. 

' The D®nadan,' said Bilbo. 'Fie is often called that here. But I thought 

N®menorean. But this is not the time for lessons!’ He turned to Strider. 

'Where have you been, my friend? Why weren't you at the feast? The Fady 


Strider looked down at Bilbo gravely. 'I know,' he said. 'But often I 

unlooked-for, and they had tidings that I wished to hear at once.' 

'Well, my dear fellow,' said Bilbo, 'now you've heard the news, can't 

this song of mine is to be finished before the end of the evening, and I am 
stuck. Fet's go off into a corner and polish it up!' 



Frodo was left to himself for a while, for Sam had fallen asleep. He 
was alone and felt rather forlorn' although all about him the folk of 
Rivendell were gathered. But those near him were silent, intent upon the 

else. Frodo began to listen. 


elven-tongues, even though he understood them little' held him in a spell, 
as soon as he began to attend to them. Almost it seemed that the words took 
shape, and visions of far lands and bright things that he had never yet 





mist above seas of foam that sighed upon the margins of the world. Then the 
enchantment became more and more dreamlike, until he felt that an endless 
river of swelling gold and silver was flowing over him, too multitudinous 

about him, and it drenched and drowned him. Swiftly he sank under its 
shining weight into a deep realm of sleep. 


water, and then suddenly into a voice. It seemed to be the voice of Bilbo 
chanting verses. Faint at first and then clearer ran the words. 




in Nimbrethil to journey in; 


her prow was fashioned like a swan, 



in chain, d rings he armoured him; 

to ward all wounds and harm from him; 


of silver was his habergeon, 



an eagle-plume upon his crest, 



he wandered far from northern strands, 



From gnashing of the Narrow Ice 





from nether heats and burning waste 


at last he came to Night of Naught, 



The winds of wrath came driving him, 


unheralded he homeward sped. 



more bright than light of diamond 



and crowned him with the living light 

he turned his prow; and in the night 


a wind of power in Tarmenel; 


as might of death across the grey 



Through Evernight he back was borne 

o'er leagues unlit and foundered shores 


when ends the world the music long, 







He saw the Mountain silent rise 


beheld afar beyond the seas. 



to Elvenhome the green and fair 


a-glimmer in a valley sheer 



He tarried there from errantry, 


and harps of gold they brought to him. 


as through the Calacirian 



where shining fall the countless years, 


and words unheard were spoken then 


forbid to those that dwell therein. 



with shining prow; no shaven oar 


and banner bright with living flame 






and wings immortal made for him, 

to sail the shoreless skies and come 



where softly silver fountains fall 



From World's End then he turned away 


and burning as an island star 


a wonder ere the waking dawn 



and heard at last the weeping sore 


gut on him mighty doom was laid, 


on Hither Shores where mortals are; 


to bear his shining lamp afar, 


The chanting ceased. Frodo opened his eyes and saw that Bilbo was 



'Now we had better have it again,' said an Elf. 

Bilbo got up and bowed. 'I am flattered, Lindir,’ he said. 'But it 






'Not too tiring for you,' the Elves answered laughing. 'You know you 
are never tired of reciting your own verses. But really we cannot answer 


'What!' cried Bilbo. 'You can't tell which parts were mine, and which 


'It is not easy for us to tell the difference between two mortals' said 



Man and a Hobbit, your judgement is poorer than I imagined. They're as 


'Maybe. To sheep other sheep no doubt appear different,' laughed 
Lindir. 'Or to shepherds. But Mortals have not been our study. We have other 


'I won't argue with you,' said Bilbo. 'I am sleepy after so much music 


He got up and came towards Frodo. 'Well, that's over,' he said in a low 
voice. 'It went off better than I expected. I don't often get asked for a 


'I am not going to try and guess,' said Frodo smiling. 

'You needn't,’ said Bilbo. 'As a matter of fact it was all mine. Except 

important. I don't know why. Otherwise he obviously thought the whole thing 
rather above my head, and he said that if I had the cheek to make verses 
about Edrendil in the house of Elrond, it was my affair. I suppose he was 



can't explain. I was half asleep when you began, and it seemed to follow on 
from something that I was dreaming about. I didn't understand that it was 


'It is difficult to keep awake here, until you get used to it;' said 
Bilbo. 'Not that hobbits would ever acquire quite the elvish appetite for 
music and poetry and tales. They seem to like them as much as food, or more. 

for some more quiet talk?' 



'Of course. This is merrymaking not business. Come and go as you like, 






They got up and withdrew quietly into the shadows, and made for the 

spite of his delight in Bilbo's company Frodo felt a tug of regret as they 
passed out of the Hall of Fire. Even as they stepped over the threshold a 


A Elbereth Gilthoniel, 




o galadhremmin ennorath, 




Frodo halted for a moment, looking back. Elrond was in his chair and 
the fire was on his face like summer -light upon the trees. Near him sat the 

dark cloak was thrown back, and he seemed to be clad in elven-mail, and a 
star shone on his breast. They spoke together, and then suddenly it seemed 
to Frodo that Arwen turned towards him, and the light of her eyes fell on 


He stood still enchanted, while the sweet syllables of the elvish song 

Elbereth,' said Bilbo. 'They will sing that, and other songs of the Blessed 
Realm, many times tonight. Come on!' 


and looked south across the ravine of the Bruinen. There they sat for some 
while, looking through the window at the bright stars above the 

news of the Shire far away, nor of the dark shadows and perils that 
encompassed them, but of the fair things they had seen in the world 
together, of the Elves, of the stars, of trees, and the gentle fall of the 


At last there came a knock on the door. 'Begging your pardon,’ said 



'And begging yours, Sam Gamgee,' replied Bilbo. 'I guess you mean that 
it is time your master went to bed.' 





up today for the first time.' 


that he has gone to bed. Good night, Frodo! Bless me, but it has been good 
to see you again! There are no folk like hobbits after all for a real good 
talk. I am getting very old, and I began to wonder if I should ever live to 

look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!' 








Next day Frodo woke early, feeling refreshed and well. He walked along 
the terraces above the loud-flowing Bruinen and watched the pale, cool sun 
rise above the far mountains, and shine down. Slanting through the thin 

nets of gossamer twinkled on every bush. Sam walked beside him, saying 
nothing, but sniffing the air, and looking every now and again with wonder 
in his eyes at the great heights in the East. The snow was white upon their 



Gandalf and Bilbo deep in talk. 'Hullo! Good morning!' said Bilbo. 'Feel 


'I feel ready for anything,' answered Frodo. 'But most of all I should 
like to go walking today and explore the valley. I should like to get into 
those pine- woods up there.' He pointed away far up the side of Rivendell to 


'You may have a chance later,' said Gandalf. 'But we cannot make any 


Suddenly as they were talking a single clear bell rang out. 'That is 
the warning bell for the Council of Elrond,' cried Gandalf. 'Come along now! 


Frodo and Bilbo followed the wizard quickly along the winding path back 



Gandalf led them to the porch where Frodo had found his friends the 
evening before. The light of the clear autumn morning was now glowing in the 
valley. The noise of bubbling waters came up from the foaming river-bed. 

dangerous flight, and the rumours of the darkness growing in the world 
outside, already seemed only the memories of a troubled dream; but the faces 
that were turned to meet them as they entered were grave. 


Frodo saw Glorfindel and Gluin; and in a corner alone Strider was sitting, 
clad in his old travel-worn clothes again. Elrond drew Frodo to a seat by 






'Here, my friends is the hobbit, Frodo son of Drogo. Few have ever come 
hither through greater peril or on an errand more urgent.' 


There was a younger dwarf at Gluin's side: his son Gimli. Beside Glorfindel 
there were several other counsellors of Elrond's household, of whom Erestor 
was the chief; and with him was Galdor, an Elf from the Grey Havens who had 

clad in green and brown, Legolas, a messenger from his father, Thranduil, 
the King of the Elves of Northern Mirkwood. And seated a little apart was a 
tall man with a fair and noble face, dark-haired and grey-eyed, proud and 


He was cloaked and booted as if for a journey on horseback; and indeed 

stained with long travel. He had a collar of silver in which a single white 
stone was set; his locks were shorn about his shoulders. On a baldric he 
wore a great horn tipped with silver that now was laid upon his knees. He 


'Here,' said Elrond, turning to Gandalf, 'is Boromir, a man from the 
South. He arrived in the grey morning, and seeks for counsel. I have bidden 


Not all that was spoken and debated in the Council need now be told. 
Much was said of events in the world outside, especially in the South, and 

heard many rumours; but the tale of Gluin was new to him, and when the dwarf 
spoke he listened attentively. It appeared that amid the splendour of their 
works of hand the hearts of the Dwarves of the Lonely Mountain were 


'It is now many years ago,' said Gluin, 'that a shadow of disquiet fell 

be whispered in secret-: it was said that we were hemmed in a narrow place, 
and that greater wealth and splendour would be found in a wider world. Some 
spoke of Moria: the mighty works of our fathers that are called in our own 

numbers to return.' 


delved there, and woke the nameless fear. Long have its vast mansions lain 




empty since the children of Durin fled. But now we spoke of it again with 
longing, and yet with dread; for no dwarf has dared to pass the doors of 

last, however, Balin listened to the whispers, and resolved to go; and 
though Dbin did not give leave willingly, he took with him Ori and Uin and 


"That was nigh on thirty years ago. For a while we had news and it 
seemed good: messages reported that Moria had been entered and a great work 

since. 


Moria -from Mordor: a horseman in the night, who called Dbin to his gate. The 
Lord Sauron the Great, so he said, wished for our friendship. Rings he would 

hobbits, of what kind they were, and where they dwelt. "For Sauron knows," 
said he, "that one of these was known to you on a time." 

'At this we were greatly troubled, and we gave no answer. And then his 

small token only of your friendship Sauron asks this," he said: "that you 
should find this thief," such was his word, "and get from him, willing or 

trifle that Sauron fancies, and an earnest of your good will. Find it, and 
three rings that the Dwarf sires possessed of old shall be returned to you, 
and the realm of Moria shall be yours for ever. Find only news of the thief, 
whether he still lives and where, and you shall have great reward and 




'At that his breath came like the hiss of snakes, and all who stood by 
shuddered, but Dbin said: "I say neither yea nor nay. I must consider this 


' "Consider well, but not too long," said he. 

" "The time of my thought is my own to spend," answered Dbin. 



'Heavy have the hearts of our chieftains been since that night. We 
needed not the fell voice of the messenger to warn us that his words held 

re-entered Mordor has not changed, and ever it betrayed us of old. Twice the 




messenger has returned, and has gone unanswered. The third and last time, so 


'And so I have been sent at last by Dbin to warn Bilbo that he is 
sought by the Enemy, and to learn, if may be, why he desires this ring, this 
least of rings. Also we crave the advice of Elrond. For the Shadow grows and 

Dale, and that he is afraid. We fear that he may yield. Already war is 
gathering on his eastern borders. If we make no answer, the Enemy may move 
Men of his rule to assail King Brand, and Dbin also.' 


that you need in order to understand the purposes of the Enemy. There is 
naught that you can do, other than to resist, with hope or without it. But 

trouble of all the western world. The Ring ! What shall we do with the Ring, 
the least of rings, the trifle that Sauron fancies? That is the doom that we 


'That is the purpose for which you are called hither. Called, I say. 
though I have not called you to me, strangers from distant lands. You have 


Yet it is not so. Believe rather that it is so ordered that we, who sit 
here, and none others, must now find counsel for the peril of the world. 

'Now, therefore, things shall be openly spoken that have been hidden 

what is the peril, the Tale of the Ring shall be told from the beginning 
even to this present. And I will begin that tale, though others shall end 


Then all listened while Elrond in his clear voice spoke of Sauron and 

ago. A part of his tale was known to some there, but the full tale to none, 
and many eyes were turned t= Elrond in fear and wonder as he told of the 
Elven-smiths of Eregion and their friendship with Moria, and their eagerness 

yet evil to behold, and they received his aid and grew mighty in craft, 
whereas he learned all their secrets, and betrayed them, and forged secretly 
in the Mountain of Fire the One Ring to be their master. But Celebrimbor was 

the land was laid waste, and the gate of Moria was shut. 




Then through all the years that followed he traced the Ring; but since 
that history is elsewhere recounted, even as Elrond himself set it down in 

deeds great and terrible, and briefly though Elrond spoke, the sun rode up 
the sky, and the morning was passing ere he ceased. 


Kings of Men to Middle-earth out of the deeps of the Sea, borne upon the 
wings of storm. Then Elendil the Tall and his mighty sons, Isildur and 
Anbrion, became great lords; and the North-realm they made in Arnor, and the 

assailed them, and they made the Last Alliance of Elves and Men, and the 
hosts of Gil-galad and Elendil were mustered in Arnor. 


splendour of their banners,' he said. v It recalled to me the glory of the 
Elder Days and the hosts of Beleriand, so many great princes and captains 

broken, and the Elves deemed that evil was ended for ever, and it was not 


'You remember?’ said Frodo, speaking his thought aloud in his 
astonishment. 'But I thought,' he stammered as Elrond turned towards him, 'I 


'So it was indeed,' answered Elrond gravely. 'But my memory reaches 
back even to the Elder Days. Edrendil was my sire, who was born in Gondolin 
before its fall; and my mother was Elwing, daughter of Dior, son of L®thien 

defeats, and many fruitless victories. 


Battle of Dagorlad before the Black Gate of Mordor, where we had the 
mastery: for the Spear of Gil-galad and the Sword of Elendil, Aiglos and 
Narsil, none could withstand. I beheld the last combat on the slopes of 

him; but Sauron himself was overthrown, and Isildur cut the Ring from his 
hand with the hilt-shard of his father's sword, and took it for his own.' 

At this the stranger, Boromir, broke in. 'So that is what became of the 

been forgotten. I have heard of the Great Ring of him that we do not name; 
but we believed that it perished from the world in the ruin of his first 






'Alas! yes,' said Elrond. 'Isildur took it, as should not have been. It 
should have been cast then into Orodruin's fire nigh at hand where it was 
made. But few marked what Isildur did. He alone stood by his father in that 

would not listen to our counsel. 


said; and therefore whether we would or no, he took it to treasure it. But 
soon he was betrayed by it to his death; and so it is named in the North 
Isildur's Bane. Yet death maybe was better than what else might have 



wonder it is that you have not heard them, Boromir. From the ruin of the 
Gladden Fields, where Isildur perished, three men only came ever back over 
the mountains after long wandering. One of these was Ohtar, the esquire of 
Isildur, who bore the shards of the sword of Elendil; and he brought them to 

Rivendell. But Narsil was broken and its light extinguished, and it has not 


'Fruitless did I call the victory of the Fast Alliance? Not wholly so, 
yet it did not achieve its end. Sauron was diminished, but not destroyed. 


foundations were not removed; for they were made with the power of the Ring, 
and while it remains they will endure. Many Elves and many mighty Men, 


many of their friends, had perished in the war. Anbrion was slain, and 
Isildur was slain; and Gil-galad and Elendil were no more. Never again shall 

Firstborn decrease, and the two kindreds are estranged. And ever since that 
day the race of N®menor has decayed, and the span of their years has 


'In the North after the war and the slaughter of the Gladden Fields the 



Evendim fell into ruin; and the heirs of Valandil removed and dwelt at 
Fornost on the high North Downs, and that now too is desolate. Men call it 
Deadmen's Dike, and they fear to tread there. For the folk of Arnor 





only green mounds in the grassy hills. 


splendour grew, recalling somewhat of the might of N®menor, ere it fell. 
High towers that people built, and strong places, and havens of many ships; 
and the winged crown of the Kings of Men was held in awe by folk of many 

midst of which the River flowed. And Minas Ithil they built, Tower of the 
Rising Moon, eastward upon a shoulder of the Mountains of Shadow; and 
westward at the feet of the White Mountains Minas Anor they made, Tower of 

seed of that tree which Isildur brought over the deep waters, and the seed 
of that tree before came from Eressla, and before that out of the Uttermost 
West in the Day before days when the world was young. 


Meneldil son of Anbrion failed, and the Tree withered, and the blood of the 
N®menoreans became mingled with that of lesser men. Then the watch upon 


walls of Mordor slept, and dark things crept back to Gorgoroth. And on a 

they made it into a place of dread; and it is called Minas Morgul, the Tower 
of Sorcery. Then Minas Anor was named anew Minas Tirith, the Tower of 


and these two cities were ever at war, but Osgiliath which lay between was 


'So it has been for many lives of men. But the Lords of Minas Tirith 
still fight on, defying our enemies, keeping the passage of the River from 

drawn to its close. For in the days of Isildur the Ruling Ring passed out of 
all knowledge, and the Three were released from its dominion. But now in 
this latter day they are in peril once more, for to our sorrow the One has 



He ceased, but at once Boromir stood up, tall and proud, before them. 

Give me leave, Master Elrond, said he, first to say more of Gondor; for 
verily from the land of Gondor I am come. And it would be well for all to 





guess little of their peril, if we should fail at last. 

'Believe not that in the land of Gondor the blood of N®menor is spent, 

East are still restrained, and the terror of Morgul kept at bay; and thus 
alone are peace and freedom maintained in the lands behind us, bulwark of 
the West. But if the passages of the River should be won, what then? 


arisen again. Smoke rises once more from Orodruin that we call Mount 


The power of the Black Land grows and we are hard beset. When the 


returned our folk were driven from Ithilien, our fair domain east of the 

year, in the days of June, sudden war came upon us out of Mordor, and we 
were swept away. We were outnumbered, for Mordor has allied itself with the 
Easterlings and the cruel Elaradrim; but it was not by numbers that we were 


'Some said that it could be seen, like a great black horseman, a dark 
shadow under the moon. Wherever he came a madness filled our foes, but fear 

of our eastern force came back, destroying the last bridge that still stood 
amid the ruins of Osgiliath. 


behind us. Four only were saved by swimming: my brother and myself and 


others. But still we fight on, holding all the west shores of Anduin; and 
those who shelter behind us give us praise, if ever they hear our name: much 



'In this evil hour I have come on an errand over many dangerous leagues 
to Elrond: a hundred and ten days I have journeyed all alone. But I do not 
seek allies in war. The might of Elrond is in wisdom not in weapons, it is 

the eve of the sudden assault a dream came to my brother in a troubled 
sleep; and afterwards a like dream came oft to him again, and once to me. 

’In that dream I thought the eastern sky grew dark and there was a 





heard a voice, remote but clear, crying: 





There shall be counsels taken 



That Doom is near at hand, 





Of these words we could understand little, and we spoke to our father, 
Denethor, Lord of Minas Tirith, wise in the lore of Gondor. This only would 
he say, that Imladris was of old the name among the Elves of a far northern 

my brother, seeing how desperate was our need, was eager to heed the dream 
and seek for Imladris; but since the way was full of doubt and danger, I 
took the journey upon myself. Loth was my father to give me leave, and long 

many had heard, but few knew where it lay.’ 

'And here in the house of Elrond more shall be made clear to you' said 

Elrond, and the blade was in two pieces. 'Here is the Sword that was 


'And who are you, and what have you to do with Minas Tirith?’ asked 
Boromir, looking in wonder at the lean face of the Ranger and his 


'He is Aragorn son of Arathorn,' said Elrond; 'and he is descended 

Chief of the D®nedain in the North, and few are now left of that folk.’ 

'Then it belongs to you, and not to me at all!' cried Frodo in 
amazement, springing to his feet, as if he expected the Ring to be demanded 



ordained that you should hold it for a while.' 

'Bring out the Ring, Frodo!' said Gandalf solemnly. 'The time has come. 


There was a hush, and all turned their eyes on Frodo. He was shaken by 
a sudden shame and fear; and he felt a great reluctance to reveal the Ring, 




and a loathing of its touch. He wished he was far away. The Ring gleamed and 


'Behold Isildur's Bane!' said Elrond. 


he muttered. 'Is then the doom of Minas Tirith come at last? But why then 


’The words were not the doom of Minas Tirith ,’ said Aragorn. 'But doom 
and great deeds are indeed at hand. For the Sword that was Broken is the 
Sword of Elendil that broke beneath him when he fell. It has been treasured 
by his heirs when all other heirlooms were lost; for it was spoken of old 

found. Now you have seen the sword that you have sought, what would you 


Do you wish for the House of Elendil to return to the Land of Gondor?' 


riddle,' answered Boromir proudly. 'Yet we are hard pressed, and the Sword 
of Elendil would be a help beyond our hope-if such a thing could indeed 
return out of the shadows of the past.' He looked again at Aragorn, and 


Frodo felt Bilbo stir impatiently at his side. Evidently he was annoyed 


All that is gold does not glitter, 





Deep roots are not reached by the frost. 



A light from the shadows shall spring; 





'Not very good perhaps, but to the point — if you need more beyond the 
word of Elrond. If that was worth a journey of a hundred and ten days to 
hear, you had best listen to it.' He sat down with a snort. 


long time ago when he first told me about himself. I almost wish that my 
adventures were not over, and that I could go with him when his day comes.' 

Aragorn smiled at him; then he turned to Boromir again. 'For my part I 





and Isildur as they stand carven in their majesty in the halls of Denethor. 

I am but the heir of Isildur, not Isildur himself. I have had a hard life 
and a long; and the leagues that lie between here and Gondor are a small 

rivers, and trodden many plains, even into the far countries of Rhyn and 


'But my home, such as I have, is in the North. For here the heirs of 
Valandil have ever dwelt in long line unbroken from father unto son for many 
generations. Our days have darkened, and we have dwindled; but ever the 

end. Lonely men are we, Rangers of the wild, hunters— but hunters ever of 
the servants of the Enemy; for they are found in many places, not in Mordor 


'If Gondor, Boromir, has been a stalwart tower, we have played another 
part. Many evil things there are that your strong walls and bright swords do 

freedom, do you say? The North would have known them little but for us. Fear 
would have destroyed them. But when dark things come from the houseless 
hills, or creep from sunless woods, they fly from us. What roads would any 

simple men at night, if the D®nedain were asleep, or were all gone into the 


'And yet less thanks have we than you. Travellers scowl at us, and 
countrymen give us scornful names. "Strider" I am to one fat man who lives 

town in ruin, if he were not guarded ceaselessly. Yet we would not have it 
otherwise. If simple folk are free from care and fear, simple they will be, 
and we must be secret to keep them so. That has been the task of my kindred, 


'But now the world is changing once again. A new hour comes. Isildur's 
Bane is found. Battle is at hand. The Sword shall be reforged. I will come 


'Isildur's Bane is found, you say,' said Boromir. 'I have seen a bright 

began, they say. How do the Wise know that this ring is his? And how has it 
passed down the years, until it is brought hither by so strange a 








'But not yet, I beg, Master!’ said Bilbo. 'Already the Sun is climbing 
to noon, and I feel the need of something to strengthen me.’ 

'I had not named you,’ said Elrond smiling. 'But I do so now. Come! 


may tell it in plain words. The briefer, the sooner shall you be refreshed.' 

'Very well,' said Bilbo. 'I will do as you bid. But I will now tell the 
true story, and if some here have heard me tell it otherwise' — he looked 

to claim the treasure as my very own in those days, and to be rid of the 
name of thief that was put on me. But perhaps I understand things a little 


To some there Bilbo's tale was wholly new, and they listened with 
amazement while the old hobbit, actually not at all displeased, recounted 
his adventure with Gollum, at full length. He did not omit a single riddle. 


Shire, if he had been allowed; but Elrond raised his hand. 

'Well told, my friend,' he said, 'but that is enough at this time. For 

him now speak!' 


the Ring from the day that it passed into his keeping. Every step of his 
journey from Hobbiton to the Ford of Bruinen was questioned and considered, 

examined. At last he sat down again. 

'Not bad,' Bilbo said to him. 'You would have made a good story of it, 

shall have to go over it all again together some time, if I am to write it 
up. There are whole chapters of stuff before you ever got here!' 


does not seem complete to me. I still want to know a good deal, especially 


Galdor of the Havens, who sat near by, overheard him. 'You speak for me 
also,’ he cried, and turning to Elrond he said: 'The Wise may have good 
reason to believe that the halfling's trove is indeed the Great Ring of long 






in the lore of the Rings, yet he is not among us. What is his counsel-if he 


'The questions that you ask, Galdor, are bound together,' said Elrond. 

I had not overlooked them, and they shall be answered. But these things it 
is the part of Gandalf to make clear; and I call upon him last, for it is 


'Some, Galdor,' said Gandalf, 'would think the tidings of Gluin, and 
the pursuit of Frodo, proof enough that the halfling's trove is a thing of 
great worth to the Enemy. Yet it is a ring. What then? The Nine the Nazgyl 

speak. 'The Three we know of. What then is this one that he desires so much? 

'There is indeed a wide waste of time between the River and the 
Mountain, between the loss and the finding. But the gap in the knowledge of 

close behind, closer even than I feared. And well is it that not until this 
year, this very summer, as it seems, did he learn the full truth. 


doors of the Necromancer in Dol Guldur, and secretly explored his ways, and 
found thus that our fears were true: he was none other than Sauron, our 
Enemy of old, at length taking shape and power again. Some, too, will 




and the Council put forth its strength and drove the evil out of Mirkwood 
and that was in the very year of the finding of this Ring: a strange chance, 


'But we were too late, as Elrond foresaw. Sauron also had watched us, 

Minas Morgul, where his Nine servants dwelt, until all was ready. Then he 
gave way before us, but only feigned to flee, and soon after came to the 
Dark Tower and openly declared himself. Then for the last time the Council 
met; for now we learned that he was seeking ever more eagerly for the One. 

Saruman said nay, and repeated what he had said to us before: that the One 


"At the worst," said he, "our Enemy knows that we have it not and 




that it still is lost. But what was lost may yet be found, he thinks. Fear 
not! His hope will cheat him. Have I not earnestly studied this matter? Into 

down the River to the Sea. There let it lie until the End.'" 

Gandalf fell silent, gazing eastward from the porch to the far peaks of 
the Misty Mountains, at whose great roots the peril of the world had so long 


'There I was at fault,' he said. 'I was lulled by the words of Saruman 

now be less.’ 


Darkness, maybe, would already be upon us. But say on!’ 

'From the first my heart misgave me, against all reason that I knew,' 

long he had possessed it. So I set a watch for him, guessing that he would 
ere long come forth from his darkness to seek for his treasure. He came, but 
he escaped and was not found. And then alas ! I let the matter rest, watching 


'Time passed with many cares, until my doubts were awakened again to 
sudden fear. Whence came the hobbit's ring? What, if my fear was true, 

dread to none, knowing the peril of an untimely whisper, if it went astray. 

In all the long wars with the Dark Tower treason has ever been our greatest 


'That was seventeen years ago. Soon I became aware that spies of many 

grew. I called for the help of the D®nedain, and their watch was doubled; 
and I opened my heart to Aragorn, the heir of Isildur.' 


late though it may seem. And since it seemed fit that Isildur's heir should 
labour to repair Isildur's fault, I went with Gandalf on the long and 


Then Gandalf told how they had explored the whole length of Wilderland, 
down even to the Mountains of Shadow and the fences of Mordor. 'There we 



we never found him, and at last I despaired. And then in my despair I 




thought again of a test that might make the finding of Gollum unneeded. The 
ring itself might tell if it were the One. The memory of words at the 

them now clearly in my heart. 


gem. Not so the One. It was round and unadorned, as it were one of the 
lesser rings; but its maker set marks upon it that the skilled, maybe, could 


'What those marks were he had not said. Who now would know? The 


And Saruman? But great though his lore may be, it must have a source. What 

Isildur alone. 



In former days the members of my order had been well received there, but 
Saruman most of all. Often he had been for long the guest of the Lords of 
the City. Less welcome did the Lord Denethor show me then than of old, and 


’ "If indeed you look only, as you say, for records of ancient days, 
and the beginnings of the City, read on! " he said. "For to me what was is 
less dark than what is to come, and that is my care. But unless you have 

naught that is not well known to me, who am master of the lore of this 


'So said Denethor. And yet there lie in his hoards many records that 
few now can read, even of the lore-masters, for their scripts and tongues 

still, unread, I guess, by any save Saruman and myself since the kings 
failed, a scroll that Isildur made himself. For Isildur did not march away 


'Some in the North, maybe,' Boromir broke in. 'All know in Gondor that 
he went first to Minas Anor and dwelt a while with his nephew Meneldil, 
instructing him, before he committed to him the rule of the South Kingdom. 

of his brother.' 


not remembered in Gondor, it would seem. For this scroll concerns the Ring, 






The Great Ring shall go now to be an heirloom of the North Kingdom; but 
records of it shall be left in Gondor, where also dwell the heirs of 
Elendil, lest a time come when the memory of these great matters shall grow 




It was hot when I first took it, hot as a glede, and my hand was 
scorched, so that I doubt if ever again I shall be free of the pain of it. 

Yet even as I write it is cooled, and it seemeth to shrink, though it loseth 

first was as clear as red flame, fadeth and is now only barely to be read. 

It is fashioned in an elven-script of Eregion, for they have no letters in 
Mordor for such subtle work; but the language is unknown to me. I deem it to 

saith I do not know; but I trace here a copy of it, lest it fade beyond 
recall. The Ring misseth, maybe, the heat of Sauron's hand, which was black 
and yet burned like fire, and so Gil-galad was destroyed; and maybe were the 

risk no hurt to this thing: of all the works of Sauron the only fair. It is 
precious to me, though I buy it with great pain. 


was indeed as Isildur guessed, in the tongue of Mordor and the servants of 
the Tower. And what was said therein was already known. For in the day that 
Sauron first put on the One, Celebrimbor, maker of the Three, was aware of 
him, and from afar he heard him speak these words, and so his evil purposes 



messages came to me out of Lurien that Aragorn had passed that way, and that 
he had found the creature called Gollum. Therefore I went first to meet him 
and hear his tale. Into what deadly perils he had gone alone I dared not 


'There is little need to tell of them,’ said Aragorn. 'If a man must 

Vale, then perils he will have. I, too, despaired at last, and I began my 
homeward journey. And then, by fortune, I came suddenly on what I sought: 
the marks of soft feet beside a muddy pool. But now the trail was fresh and 





Marshes I followed it, and then I had him. Lurking by a stagnant mere, 
peering in the water as the dark eve fell, I caught him, Gollum. He was 
covered with green slime. He will never love me, I fear; for he bit me, and 

of his teeth. I deemed it the worst part of all my journey, the road back, 
watching him day and night, making him walk before me with a halter on his 
neck, gagged, until he was tamed by lack of drink and food, driving him ever 

we had agreed that this should be done; and I was glad to be rid of his 
company, for he stank. For my part I hope never to look upon him again; but 


'Yes, long and weary,' said Gandalf, 'but not without profit. For one 
thing, the tale he told of his loss agreed with that which Bilbo has now 
told openly for the first time; but that mattered little, since I had 

the Great River nigh to the Gladden Fields. And I learned also that he had 
possessed it long. Many lives of his small kind. The power of the ring had 
lengthened his years far beyond their span; but that power only the Great 


'And if that is not proof enough, Galdor, there is the other test that 

and unadorned, the letters that Isildur reported may still be read, if one 
has the strength of will to set the golden thing in the fire a while. That I 


Ash nazg durbatulyk, ush nazg gimbatul, ash nazg thrakatulyk agh 


The change in the wizard's voice was astounding. Suddenly it became 
menacing, powerful, harsh as stone. A shadow seemed to pass over the high 



'Never before has any voice dared to utter the words of that tongue in 
Imladris, Gandalf the Grey,’ said Elrond, as the shadow passed and the 


'And let us hope that none will ever speak it here again,' answered 
Gandalf. 'Nonetheless I do not ask your pardon, Master Elrond. For if that 

doubt aside that this thing is indeed what the Wise have declared: the 




treasure of the Enemy, fraught with all his malice; and in it lies a great 
part of his strength of old. Out of the Black Years come the words that the 


One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them, One Ring to bring 
them all and in the Darkness bind them. 


loth to speak and his tale was unclear, but it is beyond all doubt that he 
went to Mordor, and there all that he knew was forced from him. Thus the 

since his servants have pursued it almost to our door, he soon will know, 
already he may know, even as I speak, that we have it here.' 

All sat silent for a while, until at length Boromir spoke. 'He is a 

of him? To what doom did you put him?’ 



There is no doubt that he was tormented, and the fear of Sauron lies black 
on his heart. Still I for one am glad that he is safely kept by the watchful 
Elves of Mirkwood. His malice is great and gives him a strength hardly to be 
believed in one so lean and withered. He could work much mischief still, if 



'Alas! alas!’ cried Legolas, and in his fair elvish face there was 
great distress. 'The tidings that I was sent to bring must now be told. They 
are not good, but only here have I learned how evil they may seem to this 


'Escaped?' cried Aragorn. 'That is ill news indeed. We shall all rue it 
bitterly, I fear. How came the folk of Thranduil to fail in their trust?' 

'Not through lack of watchfulness,' said Legolas; 'but perhaps through 

more is known of our doings than we could wish. We guarded this creature day 
and night, at Gandalf s bidding, much though we wearied of the task. But 
Gandalf bade us hope still for his cure, and we had not the heart to keep 

black thoughts.' 


old memories were stirred of his imprisonment in the deep places of the 





'Now come!' said Gandalf. 'Pray do not interrupt, my good Gluin. That 
was a regrettable misunderstanding, long set right. If all the grievances 

well abandon this Council.' 


weather we led Gollum through the woods; and there was a high tree standing 
alone far from the others which he liked to climb. Often we let him mount up 
to the highest branches, until he felt the free wind; but we set a guard at 
the tree's foot. One day he refused to come down, and the guards had no mind 

feet as well as with his hands; so they sat by the tree far into the night. 

'It was that very night of summer, yet moonless and starless, that Ores 
came on us at unawares. We drove them off after some time; they were many 

woods. When the battle was over, we found that Gollum was gone, and his 
guards were slain or taken. It then seemed plain to us that the attack had 
been made for his rescue, and that he knew of it beforehand. How that was 

are many. The dark things that were driven out in the year of the Dragon's 
fall have returned in greater numbers, and Mirkwood is again an evil place, 


'We have failed to recapture Gollum. We came on his trail among those 
of many Ores, and it plunged deep into the Forest, going south. But ere long 

drawing nigh to Dol Guldur, and that is still a very evil place; we do not 


'Well, well, he is gone,' said Gandalf. 'We have no time to seek for 
him again. He must do what he will. But he may play a part yet that neither 


'And now I will answer Galdor's other questions. What of Saruman? What 
are his counsels to us in this need? This tale I must tell in full, for only 

must resolve. It is the last chapter in the Tale of the Ring, so far as it 


'At the end of June I was in the Shire, but a cloud of anxiety was on 
my mind, and I rode to the southern borders of the little land; for I had a 
foreboding of some danger, still hidden from me but drawing near. There 





of the Black Shadow a chill smote my heart. But I found nothing save a few 
fugitives from the South; yet it seemed to me that on them sat a fear of 
which they would not speak. I turned then east and north and journeyed along 

bank beside the road with his grazing horse beside him. It was Radagast the 
Brown, who at one time dwelt at Rhosgobel, near the borders of Mirkwood. 



is one of my order, but I had not seen him for many a year. 


these parts. All I knew was that you might be found in a wild region with 


' "Your information was correct," I said. "But do not put it that way, 
if you meet any of the inhabitants. You are near the borders of the Shire 
now. And what do you want with me? It must be pressing. You were never a 


' "I have an urgent errand," he said. "My news is evil." Then he looked 

Nine are abroad again. They have crossed the River secretly and are moving 
westward. They have taken the guise of riders in black." 



" "The enemy must have some great need or purpose," said Radagast; "but 
what it is that makes him look to these distant and desolate parts, I cannot 




v "I have been told that wherever they go the Riders ask for news of a 


' "The Shire," I said; but my heart sank. For even the Wise might fear 
to withstand the Nine, when they are gathered together under their fell 

deadly fear. "Who told you, and who sent you? " I asked. 

' "Saruman the White," answered Radagast. "And he told me to say that 

will be too late." 


greatest of my order. Radagast is, of course, a worthy Wizard, a master of 
shapes and changes of hue; and he has much lore of herbs and beasts, and 




birds are especially his friends. But Saruman has long studied the arts of 

by the devices of Saruman that we drove him from Dol Guldur. It might be 
that he had found some weapons that would drive back the Nine. 



' "Then you must go now," said Radagast; "for I have wasted time in 
looking for you, and the days are running short. I was told to find you 

you will hardly reach him before the Nine discover the land that they seek. 

I myself shall turn back at once." And with that he mounted and would have 


' "Stay a moment! " I said. "We shall need your help, and the help of 
all things that will give it. Send out messages to all the beasts and birds 

this matter to Saruman and Gandalf. Let messages be sent to Orthanc." 

"I will do that," he said, and rode off as if the Nine were after 



'I could not follow him then and there. I had ridden very far already 


I stayed the night in Bree, and decided that I had no time to return to the 
Shire. Never did I make a greater mistake! 


innkeeper to send it to him. I rode away at dawn; and I came at long last to 
the dwelling of Saruman. That is far south in Isengard, in the end of the 

that that is a great open vale that lies between the Misty Mountains and the 
northmost foothills of Ered Nimrais, the White Mountains of his home. But 
Isengard is a circle of sheer rocks that enclose a valley as with a wall, 
and in the midst of that valley is a tower of stone called Orthanc. It was 

and has many secrets; yet it looks not to be a work of craft. It cannot be 
reached save by passing the circle of Isengard; and in that circle there is 


'Late one evening I came to the gate, like a great arch in the wall of 
rock; and it was strongly guarded. But the keepers of the gate were on the 

the gate closed silently behind me, and suddenly I was afraid, though I knew 






'But I rode to the foot of Orthanc, and came to the stair of Saruman 
and there he met me and led me up to his high chamber. He wore a ring on his 


"So you have come, Gandalf," he said to me gravely; but in his eyes 


v "Yes, I have come," I said. "I have come for your aid, Saruman the 


' "Have you indeed, Gandalf the Grey l " he scoffed. "For aid? It has 
seldom been heard of that Gandalf the Grey sought for aid, one so cunning 
and so wise, wandering about the lands, and concerning himself in every 


'I looked at him and wondered. "But if I am not deceived," said I, 

"things are now moving which will require the union of all our strength." 



How long. I wonder, have you concealed from me, the head of the Council, a 
matter of greatest import? What brings you now from your lurking-place in 


' "The Nine have come forth again," I answered. "They have crossed the 


v "Radagast the Brown! " laughed Saruman, and he no longer concealed 
his scorn. "Radagast the Bird-tamer! Radagast the Simple! Radagast the Fool! 

and that was all the purpose of my message. And here you will stay, Gandalf 
the Grey, and rest from journeys. For I am Saruman the Wise, Saruman 


'I looked then and saw that his robes, which had seemed white, were not 
so, but were woven of all colours, and if he moved they shimmered and 




' "White! " he sneered. "It serves as a beginning. White cloth may be 
dyed. The white page can be overwritten; and the white light can be broken." 

' "In which case it is no longer white," said I. "And he that breaks a 


' "You need not speak to me as to one of the fools that you take for 
friends," said he. "I have not brought you hither to be instructed by you, 





'He drew himself up then and began to declaim, as if he were making a 

passing. The Younger Days are beginning. The time of the Elves is over, but 
our time is at hand: the world of Men, which we must rule. But we must have 
power, power to order all things as we will, for that good which only the 


' "And listen, Gandalf, my old friend and helper! " he said, coming 

you will join with me. A new Power is rising. Against it the old allies and 
policies will not avail us at all. There is no hope left in Elves or dying 
N®menor. This then is one choice before you. before us. We may join with 

is at hand; and there will be rich reward for those that aided it. As the 
Power grows, its proved friends will also grow; and the Wise, such as you 
and I, may with patience come at last to direct its courses, to control it. 


maybe evils done by the way, but approving the high and ultimate purpose: 
Knowledge, Rule, Order; all the things that we have so far striven in vain 
to accomplish, hindered rather than helped by our weak or idle friends. 

in our means." 


only in the mouths of emissaries sent from Mordor to deceive the ignorant. I 
cannot think that you brought me so far only to weary my ears." 


that this wise course does not commend itself to you," he said. "Not yet? 

Not if some better way can be contrived? " 


whispered. "Why not? The Ruling Ring? If we could command that, then the 
Power would pass to us. That is in truth why I brought you here. For I have 
many eyes in my service, and I believe that you know where this precious 

is your business there? " As he said this a lust which he could not conceal 


' "Saruman," I said, standing away from him, "only one hand at a time 
can wield the One, and you know that well, so do not trouble to say we! But 
I would not give it, nay, I would not give even news of it to you, now that 




I learn your mind. You were head of the Council, but you have unmasked 

to yourself. I will take neither. Have you others to offer? " 

’He was cold now and perilous. "Yes," he said. "I did not expect you to 

willingly, and so saving yourself much trouble and pain. The third choice is 
to stay here, until the end." 




to persuade you. Or until it is found in your despite, and the Ruler has 
time to turn to lighter matters: to devise, say, a fitting reward for the 


' "That may not prove to be one of the lighter matters," said I. He 
laughed at me, for my words were empty, and he knew it. 


place where Saruman was accustomed to watch the stars. There is no descent 
save by a narrow stair of many thousand steps, and the valley below seems 
far away. I looked on it and saw that, whereas it had once been green and 

Isengard, for Saruman was mustering a great force on his own account, in 
rivalry of Sauron and not in his service yet. Over all his works a dark 
smoke hung and wrapped itself about the sides of Orthanc. I stood alone on 

bitter. I was pierced with cold, and I had but little room in which to pace 
to and fro, brooding on the coming of the Riders to the North. 

'That the Nine had indeed arisen I felt assured, apart from the words 

tidings by the way that could not be mistaken. Fear was ever in my heart for 
my friends in the Shire; but still I had some hope. I hoped that Frodo had 
set forth at once, as my letter had urged, and that he had reached Rivendell 

ill-founded. For my hope was founded on a fat man in Bree; and my fear was 
founded on the cunning of Sauron. But fat men who sell ale have many calls 
to answer; and the power of Sauron is still less than fear makes it. But in 

hunters before whom all have fled or fallen would falter in the Shire far 





'I saw you!' cried Frodo. 'You were walking backwards and forwards. The 


Gandalf paused astonished and looked at him. 'It was only a dream' said 
Frodo, 'but it suddenly came back to me. I had quite forgotten it. It came 


'Then it was late in coming,' said Gandalf, 'as you will see. I was in 
an evil plight. And those who know me will agree that I have seldom been in 
such need, and do not bear such misfortune well. Gandalf the Grey caught 

may leave a weak thread. 


also fallen. Yet I had caught no hint of anything wrong in his voice or in 
his eye at our meeting. If I had, I should never have gone to Isengard, or I 
should have gone more warily. So Saruman guessed, and he had concealed his 

try and win over the honest Radagast to treachery. He sought me in good 


'That was the undoing of Saruman's plot. For Radagast knew no reason 
why he should not do as I asked; and he rode away towards Mirkwood where 


had many friends of old. And the Eagles of the Mountains went far and wide, 

and the Nine Riders going hither and thither in the lands; and they heard 
news of the escape of Gollum. And they sent a messenger to bring these 


'So it was that when summer waned, there came a night of moon, and 

Orthanc; and he found me standing on the pinnacle. Then I spoke to him and 
he bore me away, before Saruman was aware. I was far from Isengard, ere the 




' "Many leagues," said he, "but not to the ends of the earth. I was 


' "Then I must have a steed on land," I said, "and a steed surpassingly 


' "Then I will bear you to Edoras, where the Lord of Rohan sits in his 
halls," he said; "for that is not very far off." And I was glad, for in the 




Riddermark of Rohan the Rohirrim, the Horse-lords, dwell, and there are no 

Mountains and the White. 


Gwaihir, for the treason of Saruman had shaken my faith. 

' "They pay a tribute of horses," he answered, "and send many yearly to 

Saruman has become evil, as you say, then their doom cannot be long 


'He set me down in the land of Rohan ere dawn; and now I have 
lengthened my tale over long. The rest must be more brief. In Rohan I found 

not listen to my warnings. He bade me take a horse and be gone; and I chose 
one much to my liking, but little to his. I took the best horse in his land, 


’Then he must be a noble beast indeed,’ said Aragorn; 'and it grieves 
me more than many tidings that might seem worse to learn that Sauron levies 


'Nor is it now, I will swear,’ said Boromir. 'It is a lie that comes 
from the Enemy. I know the Men of Rohan; true and valiant, our allies, 
dwelling still in the lands that we gave them long ago.’ 


’Saruman has fallen under it. Rohan is beset. Who knows what you will find 


'Not this at least.’ said Boromir, ’that they will buy their lives with 
horses. They love their horses next to their kin. And not without reason, 
for the horses of the Riddermark come from the fields of the North, far from 

free days of old.’ 


have been foaled in the morning of the world. The horses of the Nine cannot 
vie with him; tireless, swift as the flowing wind. Shadowfax they called 
him. By day his coat glistens like silver; and by night it is like a shade, 

mounted him, but I took him and I tamed him, and so speedily he bore me that 
I reached the Shire when Frodo was on the Barrow-downs, though I set out 





'But fear grew in me as I rode. Ever as I came north I heard tidings of 
the Riders, and though I gained on them day by day, they were ever before 
me. They had divided their forces, I learned: some remained on the eastern 

south. I came to Hobbiton and Frodo had gone; but I had words with old 
Gamgee. Many words and few to the point. He had much to say about the 


' "I can't abide changes," said he, "not at my time of life, and least 
of all changes for the worst." "Changes for the worst," he repeated many 


' "Worst is a bad word," I said to him, "and I hope you do not live to 

less than a week before, and that a black horseman had come to the Hill the 
same evening. Then I rode on in fear. I came to Buckland and found it in 
uproar, as busy as a hive of ants that has been stirred with a stick. I came 

threshold there lay a cloak that had been Frodo's. Then for a while hope 
left me, and I did not wait to gather news, or I might have been comforted; 
but I rode on the trail of the Riders. It was hard to follow, for it went 

ridden towards Bree; and that way I went, for I thought of words that might 


' "Butterbur they call him," thought I. "If this delay was his fault, I 
will melt all the butter in him. I will roast the old fool over a slow 
fire." He expected no less, and when he saw my face he fell down flat and 


'What did you do to him?' cried Frodo in alarm. 'He was really very 


Gandalf laughed. 'Don't be afraid!' he said. 'I did not bite, and I 

when he stopped quaking, that I embraced the old fellow. How it happened I 
could not then guess, but I learned that you had been in Bree the night 


' "Strider! " I cried, shouting for joy. 

"Yes, sir, I am afraid so, sir," said Butterbur, mistaking me. "He 


They behaved very queer all the time they were here: wilful, you might say." 




"Ass! Fool! Thrice worthy and beloved Barliman! " said I. "It's the 
best news I have had since midsummer: it's worth a gold piece at the least. 

seven years! " said I. "Now I can take a night's rest, the first since I 


'Sol stayed there that night, wondering much what had become of the 
Riders; for only of two had there yet been any news in Bree, it seemed. But 
in the night we heard more. Five at least came from the west, and they threw 

Bree-folk are still shivering and expecting the end of the world. I got up 


'I do not know, but it seems clear to me that this is what happened. 

Their Captain remained in secret away south of Bree, while two rode ahead 
through the village, and four more invaded the Shire. But when these were 

tidings, and so left the Road unguarded for a while, except by their spies. 

The Captain then sent some eastward straight across country, and he himself 


'I galloped to Weathertop like a gale, and I reached it before sundown 
on my second day from Bree-and they were there before me. They drew 


from me, for they felt the coming of my anger and they dared not face it 

besieged on the hill -top, in the old ring of Amon Syl. I was hard put to it 
indeed: such light and flame cannot have been seen on Weathertop since the 


'At sunrise I escaped and fled towards the north. I could not hope to 

would have been folly to try with all the Nine at my heels. Sol had to 
trust to Aragorn. But I hoped to draw some of them off, and yet reach 
Rivendell ahead of you and send out help. Four Riders did indeed follow me, 

helped a little, for there were only five, not nine, when your camp was 


’I reached here at last by a long hard road, up the Floarwell and 
through the Ettenmoors, and down from the north. It took me nearly fourteen 





troll-fells, and Shadowfax departed. I sent him back to his master; but a 
great friendship has grown between us, and if I have need he will come at my 
call. But so it was that I came to Rivendell only three days before the 

indeed. 


forgive the length of it. But such a thing has not happened before, that 
Gandalf broke tryst and did not come when he promised. An account to the 


'Well, the Tale is now told, from first to last. Here we all are, and 
here is the Ring. But we have not yet come any nearer to our purpose. What 


There was silence. At last Elrond spoke again. 


him and he is deep in all our counsels. It is perilous to study too deeply 
the arts of the Enemy, for good or for ill. But such falls and betrayals, 
alas, have happened before. Of the tales that we have heard this day the 

here; and it seems to me that he is perhaps not so alone and singular as I 
had thought him. The world has changed much since I last was on the 



'The Barrow- wights we know by many names; and of the Old Forest 



march. Time was when a squirrel could go from tree to tree from what is now 
the Shire to Dunland west of Isengard. In those lands I journeyed once, and 
many things wild and strange I knew. But I had forgotten Bombadil, if indeed 

then was older than the old. That was not then his name. Iarwain Ben-adar we 
called him, oldest and fatherless. But many another name he has since been 
given by other folk: Forn by the Dwarves, Orald by Northern Men, and other 
names beside. He is a strange creature, but maybe I should have summoned 






'Could we not still send messages to him and obtain his help?’ asked 




Erestor. 'It seems that he has a power even over the Ring.' 


has no power over him. He is his own master. But he cannot alter the Ring 
itself, nor break its power over others. And now he is withdrawn into a 
little land, within bounds that he has set, though none can see them, 


'But within those bounds nothing seems to dismay him,' said Erestor. 
'Would he not take the Ring and keep it there, for ever harmless?’ 


folk of the world begged him, but he would not understand the need. And if 
he were given the Ring, he would soon forget it, or most likely throw it 
away. Such things have no hold on his mind. He would be a most unsafe 


'But in any case,’ said Glorfindel, 'to send the Ring to him would only 
postpone the day of evil. He is far away. We could not now take it back to 

Lord of the Rings would learn of its hiding place and would bend all his 
power towards it. Could that power be defied by Bombadil alone? I think not. 

I think that in the end, if all else is conquered, Bombadil will fall, Last 


'I know little of Iarwain save the name,’ said Galdor; 'but Glorfindel, 

I think, is right. Power to defy our Enemy is not in him, unless such power 

the very hills. What power still remains lies with us, here in Imladris, or 
with Cirdan at the Havens, or in Lurien. But have they the strength, have we 
here the strength to withstand the Enemy, the coming of Sauron at the last, 


'I have not the strength,’ said Elrond; 'neither have they.’ 


Glorfindel, 'two things only remain for us to attempt: to send it over the 



that we here possess,’ said Elrond. 'And they who dwell beyond the Sea would 
not receive it: for good or ill it belongs to Middle-earth; it is for us who 


’Then, said Glorfindel, ’let us cast it into the deeps, and so make the 
lies of Saruman come true. For it is clear now that even at the Council his 




feet were already on a crooked path. He knew that the Ring was not lost for 


Yet oft in lies truth is hidden: in the Sea it would be safe.' 

'Not safe for ever,' said Gandalf. 'There are many things in the deep 

thought only for a season, or for a few lives of Men, or for a passing age 
of the world. We should seek a final end of this menace, even if we do not 


'And that we shall not find on the roads to the Sea,' said Galdor. 'If 
the return to Iarwain be thought too dangerous, then flight to the S,a is 

to take the western way, when he learns what has befallen. He soon will. The 
Nine have been unhorsed indeed but that is but a respite, ere they find new 
steeds and swifter. Only the waning might of Gondor stands now between him 

assailing the White Towers and the Havens, hereafter the Elves may have no 
escape from the lengthening shadows of Middle-earth.' 

'Long yet will that march be delayed,' said Boromir. 'Gondor wanes, you 



'And yet its vigilance can no longer keep back the Nine,' said Galdor. 

'And other roads he may find that Gondor does not guard.' 


has declared: to hide the Ring for ever; or to unmake it. But both are 
beyond our power. Who will read this riddle for us?’ 


what will come to pass, if we take this road or that. But it seems to me now 
clear which is the road that we must take. The westward road seems easiest. 
Therefore it must be shunned. It will be watched. Too often the Elves have 
fled that way. Now at this last we must take a hard road, a road unforeseen. 

send the Ring to the Fire.’ 


sunlit valley filled with the noise of clear waters, felt a dead darkness in 
his heart. Boromir stirred, and Frodo looked at him. He was fingering his 


’I do not understand all this,' he said. 'Saruman is a traitor, but did 




he not have a glimpse of wisdom? Why do you speak ever of hiding and 
destroying? Why should we not think that the Great Ring has come into our 

the Free may surely defeat the Enemy. That is what he most fears, I deem. 

The Men of Gondor are valiant, and they will never submit; but they 
may be beaten down. Valour needs first strength, and then a weapon. Let the 



’Alas, no,’ said Elrond. ’We cannot use the Ruling Ring. That we now 
know too well. It belongs to Sauron and was made by him alone, and is 
altogether evil. Its strength, Boromir, is too great for anyone to wield at 

them it holds an even deadlier peril. The very desire of it corrupts the 
heart. Consider Saruman. If any of the Wise should with this Ring overthrow 
the Lord of Mordor, using his own arts, he would then set himself on 

reason why the Ring should be destroyed: as long as it is in the world it 
will be a danger even to the Wise. For nothing is evil in the beginning. 
Even Sauron was not so. I fear to take the Ring to hide it. I will not take 




Boromir looked at them doubtfully, but he bowed his head. 'So be it,’ 
he said. 'Then in Gondor we must trust to such weapons as we have. And at 

Sword-that-was-Broken may still stem the tide — if the hand that wields it 
has inherited not an heirloom only, but the sinews of the Kings of Men.’ 

'Who can tell?’ said Aragorn. 'But we will put it to the test one day.’ 


not ask for aid, we need it. It would comfort us to know that others fought 
also with all the means that they have.' 


realms that you know not, and they are hidden from you. Anduin the Great 
flows past many shores, ere it comes to Argonath and the Gates of Gondor.' 

'Still it might be well for all,' said Gluin the Dwarf, 'if all these 

rings there may be, less treacherous, that might be used in our need. The 
Seven are lost to us — if Balin has not found the ring of Thrur which was 




the last; naught has been heard of it since Thrur perished in Moria. Indeed 

went away.’ 


Thrbin his son, but not Thrbin to Thorin. It was taken with torment from 
Thrbin in the dungeons of Dol Guldur. I came too late.' 


still there are the Three. What of the Three Rings of the Elves? Very mighty 
Rings, it is said. Do not the Elf-lords keep them? Yet they too were made by 
the Dark Lord long ago. Are they idle? I see Elf-lords here. Will they not 



Elrond. 'The Three were not made by Sauron, nor did he ever touch them. But 
of them it is not permitted to speak. So much only in this' hour of doubt I 
may now say. They are not idle. But they were not made as weapons of war or 

strength or domination or hoarded wealth, but understanding, making, and 
healing, to preserve all things unstained. These things the Elves of 
Middle-earth have in some measure gained, though with sorrow. But all that 

and their minds and hearts will become revealed to Sauron, if he regains the 
One. It would be better if the Three had never been. That is his purpose.' 

'But what then would happen, if the Ruling Ring were destroyed as you 


'We know not for certain,' answered Elrond sadly. 'Some hope that the 

their rulers might heal the hurts of the world that he has wrought. But 
maybe when the One has gone, the Three will fail, and many fair things will 


'Yet all the Elves are willing to endure this chance,' said Glorfindel 
'if by it the power of Sauron may be broken, and the fear of his dominion be 


'Thus we return once more to the destroying of the Ring,' said Erestor, 


Fire in which it was made? That is the path of despair. Of folly I would 
say, if the long wisdom of Elrond did not forbid me.' 







recognize necessity, when all other courses have been weighed, though as 
folly it may appear to those who cling to false hope. Well, let folly be our 
cloak, a veil before the eyes of the Enemy! For he is very wise, and weighs 

that he knows is desire, desire for power; and so he judges all hearts. Into 
his heart the thought will not enter that any will refuse it, that having 
the Ring we may seek to destroy it. If we seek this, we shall put him out of 



will be very hard. And neither strength nor wisdom will carry us far upon 
it. This quest may be attempted by the weak with as much hope as the strong. 
Yet such is oft the course of deeds that move the wheels of the world: small 
hands do them because they must, while the eyes of the great are elsewhere.' 


more! It is plain enough what you are pointing at. Bilbo the silly hobbit 
started this affair, and Bilbo had better finish it, or himself. I was very 
comfortable here, and getting on with my book. If you want to know, I am 

happily ever afterwards to the end of his days. It is a good ending, and 
none the worse for having been used before. Now I shall have to alter that: 

be several more chapters, if I live to write them. It is a frightful 
nuisance. When ought I to start? 


lips when he saw that all the others regarded the old hobbit with grave 
respect. Only Gluin smiled, but his smile came from old memories. 


this affair, you might be expected to finish it. But you know well enough 
now that starting is too great a claim for any, and that only a small part 
is played in great deeds by any hero. You need not bow! Though the word was 


But one beyond your strength, Bilbo. You cannot take this thing back. It has 
passed on. If you need my advice any longer, I should say that your part is 
ended, unless as a recorder. Finish your book, and leave the ending 

they come back.' 





he said. 'As all your unpleasant advice has been good, I wonder if this 
advice is not bad. Still, I don't suppose I have the strength or luck left 
to deal with the Ring. It has grown, and I have not. But tell me: what do 




'Exactly! And who are they to be? That seems to me what this Council 
has to decide, and all that it has to decide. Elves may thrive on speech 
alone, and Dwarves endure great weariness; but I am only an old hobbit, and 



No one answered. The noon-bell rang. Still no one spoke. Frodo glanced 
at all the faces, but they were not turned to him. All the Council sat with 
downcast eyes, as if in deep thought. A great dread fell on him, as if he 

vainly hoped might after all never be spoken. An overwhelming longing to 
rest and remain at peace by Bilbo's side in Rivendell filled all his heart. 

At last with an effort he spoke, and wondered to hear his own words, as if 


'I will take the Ring,' he said, 'though I do not know the way.' 

Elrond raised his eyes and looked at him, and Frodo felt his heart 

that I have heard,' he said, 'I think that this task is appointed for you, 

Frodo; and that if you do not find a way, no one will. This is the hour of 
the Shire-folk, when they arise from their quiet fields to shake the towers 

if they are wise, why should they expect to know it, until the hour has 


'But it is a heavy burden. So heavy that none could lay it on another. 

I do not lay it on you. But if you take it freely, I will say that your 

H®rin, and T®rin, and Beren himself were assembled together your seat 




'But you won't send him off alone surely, Master?' cried Sam, unable to 
contain himself any longer, and jumping up from the corner where he had been 





'No indeed!' said Elrond, turning towards him with a smile. 'You at 
least shall go with him. It is hardly possible to separate you from him, 


Sam sat down, blushing and muttering. 'A nice pickle we have landed 
ourselves in, Mr. Frodo!’ he said, shaking his head. 








Later that day the hobbits held a meeting of their own in Bilbo's room. 

Council, and had been chosen as Frodo's companion. 

'It's most unfair,' said Pippin. 'Instead of throwing him out, and 


'Rewards!' said Frodo. 'I can't imagine a more severe punishment. You 
are not thinking what you are saying: condemned to go on this hopeless 
journey, a reward? Yesterday I dreamed that my task was done, and I could 


'I don't wonder,' said Merry, 'and I wish you could. But we are envying 
Sam, not you. If you have to go, then it will be a punishment for any of us 

been through some stiff times. We want to go on.' 


together, and we will. I shall go, unless they chain me up. There must be 
someone with intelligence in the party.' 


looking in through the window, which was near the ground. 'But you are all 
worrying yourselves unnecessarily. Nothing is decided yet.' 


were shut up for hours.' 


eye-opener. Even old Gandalf. I think Legolas's bit of news about Gollum 
caught even him on the hop, though he passed it off.' 


heard of it from Gwaihir. If you want to know, the only real eye-openers, as 
you put it, were you and Frodo; and I was the only one that was not 


'Well, anyway,' said Bilbo, 'nothing was decided beyond choosing poor 
Frodo and Sam. I was afraid all the time that it might come to that, if I 

reports come in. Have they started yet, Gandalf?' 

'Yes,' said the wizard. 'Some of the scouts have been sent out already. 





with the Rangers, and maybe with Thranduil's folk in Mirkwood. And 


has gone with Elrond's sons. We shall have to scour the lands all round for 
many long leagues before any move is made. So cheer up, Frodo! You will 


'Ah!' said Sam gloomily. 'We'll just wait long enough for winter to 


'That can't be helped,' said Bilbo. 'It's your fault partly, Frodo my 

can't help thinking. Not the day I should have chosen for letting the S.-B.s 
into Bag End. But there it is: you can't wait now fill spring; and you can't 



and stones crack in the frosty night, 


'tis evil in the Wild to fare. 



'I am afraid it will,' said Gandalf. 'We can't start until we have 


T thought they were all destroyed in the flood,' said Merry. 


their master is in them, and they stand or fall by him. We hope that they 
were all unhorsed and unmasked, and so made for a while less dangerous; but 
we must find out for certain. In the meantime you should try and forget your 
troubles, Frodo. I do not know if I can do anything to help you; but I will 

the party. He was right. I think I shall come with you.' 

So great was Frodo's delight at this announcement that Gandalf left the 

only said I think I shall come. Do not count on anything yet. In this matter 
Elrond will have much to say, and your friend the Strider. Which reminds me, 


'How long do you think I shall have here?’ said Frodo to Bilbo when 


'Oh, I don't know. I can't count days in Rivendell,' said Bilbo. 'But 
quite long, I should think. We can have many a good talk. What about helping 




me with my book, and making a start on the next? Have you thought of an 




'Oh, that won't do!' said Bilbo. 'Books ought to have good endings. How 
would this do: and they all settled down and lived together happily ever 




'Ah!' said Sam. 'And where will they live? That's what I often wonder.' 

For a while the hobbits continued to talk and think of the past journey 
and of the perils that lay ahead; but such was the virtue of the land of 

future, good or ill, was not forgotten, but ceased to have any power over 
the present. Health and hope grew strong in them, and they were content with 
each good day as it came, taking pleasure in every meal, and in every word 


So the days slipped away, as each morning dawned bright and fair, and 

golden light faded to pale silver, and the lingering leaves fell from the 
naked trees. A wind began to blow chill from the Misty Mountains to the 
east. The Hunter's Moon waxed round in the night sky, and put to flight all 

the Moon waned again, it shone brighter and brighter. Frodo could see it 
from his window, deep in the heavens burning like a watchful eye that glared 


The hobbits had been nearly two months in the House of Elrond, and 
November had gone by with the last shreds of autumn, and December was 

springs of the Hoarwell into the Ettenmoors; and others had gone west, and 
with the help of Aragorn and the Rangers had searched the lands far down the 
Greyflood, as far as Tharbad, where the old North Road crossed the river by 

the Mountains and entered Mirkwood, while others had climbed the pass at the 
source of the Gladden River, and had come down into Wilderland and over the 
Gladden Fields and so at length had reached the old home of Radagast at 
Rhosgobel. Radagast was not there; and they had returned over the high pass 

were the last to return; they had made a great journey, passing down the 




Silverlode into a strange country, but of their errand they would not speak 


In no region had the messengers discovered any signs or tidings of the 
Riders or other servants of the Enemy. Even from the Eagles of the Misty 

Gollum; but the wild wolves were still gathering, and were hunting again far 
up the Great River. Three of the black horses had been found at once drowned 
in the flooded Ford. On the rocks of the rapids below it searchers 

tattered. Of the Black Riders no other trace was to be seen, and nowhere was 
their presence to be felt. It seemed that they had vanished from the North. 

’Eight out of the Nine are accounted for at least,' said Gandalf. 'It 

Ringwraiths were scattered, and have been obliged to return as best they 
could to their Master in Mordor, empty and shapeless. 


again. Of course the Enemy has other servants, but they will have to journey 
all the way to the borders of Rivendell before they can pick up our trail. 

And if we are careful that will be hard to find. But we must delay no 



time has come,' he said. 'If the Ring is to set out, it must go soon. But 
those who go with it must not count on their errand being aided by war or 
force. They must pass into the domain of the Enemy far from aid. Do you 


'I do,' said Frodo. 'I will go with Sam.' 


can foresee very little of your road; and how your task is to be achieved I 
do not know. The Shadow has crept now to the feet of the Mountains, and 
draws nigh even to the borders of Greyflood; and under the Shadow all is 



may find friends upon your way when you least look for it. I will send out 
messages, such as I can contrive, to those whom I know in the wide world; 
but so perilous are the lands now become that some may well miscarry, or 


'And I will choose you companions to go with you, as far as they will 




or fortune allows. The number must be few, since your hope is in speed and 

little, save to arouse the power of Mordor. 

'The Company of the Ring shall be Nine; and the Nine Walkers shall be 

servant, Gandalf will go; for this shall be his great task, and maybe the 


'For the rest, they shall represent the other Free Peoples of the 
World: Elves, Dwarves, and Men. Legolas shall be for the Elves; and Gimli 

of the Mountains, and maybe beyond. For men you shall have Aragorn son of 
Arathorn, for the Ring of Isildur concerns him closely.' 



’Yes,' he said with a smile. 'I ask leave once again to be your 


'I would have begged you to come,’ said Frodo, 'only I thought you were 


'I am,' said Aragorn. 'And the Sword-that-was-Broken shall be reforged 

hundreds of miles. Therefore Boromir will also be in the Company. He is a 


’There remain two more to be found,' said Elrond. "These I will 
consider. Of my household I may find some that it seems good to me to send.' 

'But that will leave no place for us!' cried Pippin in dismay. 'We 


'That is because you do not understand and cannot imagine what lies 


'Neither does Frodo,' said Gandalf, unexpectedly supporting Pippin. 


the danger, they would not dare to go. But they would still wish to go, or 
wish that they dared, and be shamed and unhappy. I think, Elrond, that in 
this matter it would be well to trust rather to their friendship than to 

could not storm the Dark Tower, nor open the road to the Fire by the power 


'You speak gravely,' said Elrond, 'but I am in doubt. The Shire, I 
forebode, is not free now from peril; and these two I had thought to send 




back there as messengers, to do what they could, according to the fashion of 

the younger of these two, Peregrin Took, should remain. My heart is against 


'Then, Master Elrond, you will have to lock me in prison, or send me 
home tied in a sack,' said Pippin. 'For otherwise I shall follow the 


'Let it be so then. You shall go,’ said Elrond, and he sighed. 'Now the 


The Sword of Elendil was forged anew by Elvish smiths, and on its blade 
was traced a device of seven stars set between the crescent Moon and the 
rayed Sun, and about them was written many runes; for Aragorn son of 

sword when it was made whole again; the light of the sun shone redly in it, 
and the light of the moon shone cold, and its edge was hard and keen. And 



the perils they would meet; and they pondered the storied and figured maps 
and books of lore that were in the house of Elrond. Sometimes Frodo was with 

time as he could with Bilbo. 

In those last days the hobbits sat together in the evening in the Hall 

and L®thien and the winning of the Great Jewel; but in the day, while Merry 
and Pippin were out and about, Frodo and Sam were to be found with Bilbo in 
his own small room. Then Bilbo would read passages from his book (which 

of Frodo's adventures. 


hobbit pulled out from under his bed a wooden box. He lifted the lid and 


'Here is your sword,' he said. 'But it was broken, you know. I took it 
to keep it safe but I've forgotten to ask if the smiths could mend it. No 

know?' 


Then he drew it, and its polished and well-tended blade glittered suddenly, 




cold and bright. This is Sting,' he said, and thrust it with little effort 
deep into a wooden beam. 'Take it, if you like. I shan’t want it again, I 




'Also there is this!' said Bilbo, bringing out a parcel which seemed to 
be rather heavy for its size. He unwound several folds of old cloth, and 

almost as linen, cold as ice, and harder than steel. It shone like moonlit 
silver, and was studded with white gems. With it was a belt of pearl and 


'It's a pretty thing, isn't it?' said Bilbo, moving it in the light. 


Michel Delving before I started, and packed it with my luggage: I brought 
all the mementoes of my Journey away with me, except the Ring. But I did not 
expect to use this, and I don't need it now, except to look at sometimes. 



'I should look — well, I don't think I should look right in it,' said 


'Just what I said myself,’ said Bilbo. 'But never mind about looks. You 

with me. Don't tell anybody else! But I should feel happier if I knew you 
were wearing it. I have a fancy it would turn even the knives of the Black 


'Very well, I will take it,' said Frodo. Bilbo put it on him, and 
fastened Sting upon the glittering belt; and then Frodo put over the top his 


'Just a plain hobbit you look,' said Bilbo. 'But there is more about 
you now than appears on the surface. Good luck to you!' He turned away and 


'I cannot thank you as I should, Bilbo, for this, and for all our past 


'Don't try!' said the old hobbit, turning round and slapping him on the 
back. 'Ow!' he cried. 'You are too hard now to slap! But there you are: 

is: take as much care of yourself as you can. and bring back all the news 
you can, and any old songs and tales you can come by. I’ll do my best to 
finish my book before you return. I should like to write the second book, if 




I am spared.' He broke off and turned to the window again, singing softly. 






in summers that have been; 



with morning mist and silver sun 



of how the world will be 



For still there are so many things 




I sit beside the fire and think 


that I shall never know. 





and voices at the door. 


streaming through the bare branches of the trees, and seething in the dark 
pines on the hills. Ragged clouds were hurrying overhead, dark and low. As 
the cheerless shadows of the early evening began to fall the Company made 





journey under cover of night as often as they could, until they were far 


'You should fear the many eyes of the servants of Sauron,' he said. 'I 
do not doubt that news of the discomfiture of the Riders has already reached 
him, and he will be filled with wrath. Soon now his spies on foot and wing 

as you go on your way.' 


in battle. Aragorn had And®ril but no other weapon, and he went forth clad 
only in rusty green and brown, as a Ranger of the wilderness. Boromir had a 
long sword, in fashion like And®ril but of less lineage and he bore also a 


'Loud and clear it sounds in the valleys of the hills,' he said, 'and 

blast, and the echoes leapt from rock to rock, and all that heard that voice 
in Rivendell sprang to their feet. 


'until you stand once more on the borders of your land, and dire need is on 


'Maybe,' said Boromir. 'But always I have let my horn cry at setting 
forth, and though thereafter we may walk in the shadows, I will not go forth 


Gimli the dwarf alone wore openly a short shirt of steel-rings, for 

Legolas had a bow and a quiver, and at his belt a long white knife. The 
younger hobbits wore the swords that they had taken from the barrow; but 
Frodo took only Sting; and his mail-coat, as Bilbo wished, remained hidden. 

the mate of Orcrist that lay now upon the breast of Thorin under the Lonely 


All were well furnished by Elrond with thick warm clothes, and they had 
jackets and cloaks lined with fur. Spare food and clothes and blankets and 

had brought from Bree. 


was glossy and seemed to have the vigour of youth. It was Sam who had 
insisted on choosing him, declaring that Bill (as he called him) would pine, 






'That animal can nearly talk,' he said, 'and would talk, if he stayed 
here much longer. He gave me a look as plain as Mr. Pippin could speak it: 

going as the beast of burden, yet he was the only member of the Company that 


Their farewells had been said in the great hall by the fire, and they 
were only waiting now for Gandalf, who had not yet come out of the house. A 
gleam of firelight came from the open doors, and soft lights were glowing in 

Frodo. Aragorn sat with his head bowed to his knees; only Elrond knew fully 
what this hour meant to him. The others could be seen as grey shapes in the 


Sam was standing by the pony, sucking his teeth, and staring moodily 
into the gloom where the river roared stonily below; his desire for 


'Bill, my lad,’ he said, 'you oughtn't to have took up with us. You 

swished his tail and said nothing. 


mind all the things that he had stowed in it, wondering if he had forgotten 
anything: his chief treasure, his cooking gear; and the little box of salt 
that he always carried and refilled when he could; a good supply of 

hose: linen; various small belongings of his master's that Frodo had 
forgotten and Sam had stowed to bring them out in triumph when they were 


'Rope!' he muttered. 'No rope! And only last night you said to 
yourself: "Sam, what about a bit of rope? You'll want it, if you haven't got 


At that moment Elrond came out with Gandalf, and he called the Company 
to him. 'This is my last word,' he said in a low voice. 'The Ring-bearer is 

neither to cast away the Ring, nor to deliver it to any servant of the Enemy 
nor indeed to let any handle it, save members of the Company and the 
Council, and only then in gravest need. The others go with him as free 





aside into other paths, as chance allows. The further you go, the less easy 
will it be to withdraw; yet no oath or bond is laid on you to go further 
than you will. For you do not yet know the strength of your hearts, and you 


'Faithless is he that says farewell when the road darkens,' said Gimli. 

'Maybe,' said Elrond, 'but let him not vow to walk in the dark, who has 




'Or break it,' said Elrond. 'Look not too far ahead! But go now with 
good hearts ! Farewell, and may the blessing of Elves and Men and all Free 
Folk go with you. May the stars shine upon your faces!’ 


suppose you will be able to keep a diary, Frodo my lad, but I shall expect a 
full account when you get back. And don't be too long! Farewell!' 


go, bidding them farewell with soft voices. There was no laughter, and no 
song or music. At last they turned away and faded silently into the dusk. 

They crossed the bridge and wound slowly up the long steep paths that 

moor where the wind hissed through the heather. Then with one glance at the 
Last Flomely Flouse twinkling below them they strode away far into the night. 

At the Ford of Bruinen they left the Road and turning southwards went 

course west of the Mountains for many miles and days. The country was 


rougher and more barren than in the green vale of the Great River in 
Wilderland on the other side of the range, and their going would be slow; 

spies of Sauron had hitherto seldom been seen in this empty country, and the 
paths were little known except to the people of Rivendell. 

Gandalf walked in front, and with him went Aragorn, who knew this land 

were keen was the rearguard. The first part of their journey was hard and 
dreary, and Frodo remembered little of it, save the wind. For many sunless 
days an icy blast came from the Mountains in the east, and no garment seemed 

they seldom felt warm, either moving or at rest. They slept uneasily during 




the middle of the day, in some hollow of the land, or hidden under the 
tangled thorn-bushes that grew in thickets in many places. In the late 

cheerless as a rule, for they could seldom risk the lighting of a fire. In 
the evening they went on again, always as nearly southward as they could 


At first it seemed to the hobbits that although they walked and 

getting nowhere. Each day the land looked much the same as it had the day 
before. Yet steadily the mountains were drawing nearer. South of Rivendell 
they rose ever higher, and bent westwards; and about the feet of the main 

filled with turbulent waters. Paths were few and winding, and led them often 
only to the edge of some sheer fall, or down into treacherous swamps. 

They had been a fortnight on the way when the weather changed. The wind 

lifted and melted away, and the sun came out, pale and bright. There came a 
cold clear dawn at the end of a long stumbling night-march. The travellers 
reached a low ridge crowned with ancient holly -trees whose grey-green trunks 

leaves shone and their berries glowed red in the light of the rising sun. 

Away in the south Frodo could see the dim shapes of lofty mountains 
that seemed now to stand across the path that the Company was taking. At the 

like a tooth tipped with snow; its great, bare, northern precipice was still 
largely in the shadow, but where the sunlight slanted upon it, it glowed 


Gandalf stood at Frodo’s side and looked out under his hand. 'We have 
done well,’ he said. 'We have reached the borders of the country that Men 

name. Five-and-forty leagues as the crow flies we have come, though many 
long miles further our feet have walked. The land and the weather will be 


'Dangerous or not, a real sunrise is mighty welcome,’ said Frodo, 
throwing back his hood and letting the morning light fall on his face. 

’But the mountains are ahead of us,’ said Pippin. 'We must have turned 





'No,' said Gandalf. 'But you see further ahead in the clear light. 




Elrond's house, but I suppose you never thought to look at them?' 

'Yes I did, sometimes,' said Pippin, 'but I don't remember them. Frodo 


'I need no map,' said Gimli, who had come up with Legolas, and was 
gazing out before him with a strange light in his deep eyes. 'There is the 

mountains into many works of metal and of stone, and into many songs and 
tales. They stand tall in our dreams: Baraz, Zirak, Shathyr. 


them and their names, for under them lies Khazad-dym, the Dwarrowdelf, that 
is now called the Black Pit, Moria in the Elvish tongue. Yonder stands 
Barazinbar, the Redhorn, cruel Caradhras; and beyond him are Silvertine and 

Zirak-zigil and Bundushathyr. 


deep-shadowed valley which we cannot forget: Azanulbizar, the Dimrill Dale, 
which the Elves call Nanduhirion.' 


climb the pass that is called the Redhorn Gate, under the far side of 
Caradhras, we shall come down by the Dimrill Stair into the deep vale of the 
Dwarves. There lies the Mirrormere, and there the River Silverlode rises in 



springs of Kibil-nvla. My heart trembles at the thought that I may see them 


'May you have joy of the sight, my good dwarf f said Gandalf. 'But 
whatever you may do, we at least cannot stay in that valley. We must go down 
the Silverlode into the secret woods, and so to the Great River, and then 







'To the end of the journey — in the end,' said Gandalf. 'We cannot 
look too far ahead. Let us be glad that the first stage is safely over. I 





wholesome air about Hollin. Much evil must befall a country before it wholly 
forgets the Elves, if once they dwelt there.’ 


race strange to us of the silvan folk, and the trees and the grass do not 
now remember them: Only I hear the stones lament them: deep they delved us, 
fair they wrought us, high they builded us; but they are gone. They are 


That morning they lit a fire in a deep hollow shrouded by great bushes 

set out. They did not hurry to bed afterwards, for they expected to have all 
the night to sleep in, and they did not mean to go on again until the 
evening of the next day. Only Aragorn was silent and restless. After a while 

shadow of a tree, looking out southwards and westwards, with his head posed 
as if he was listening. Then he returned to the brink of the dell and looked 


'What is the matter, Strider?’ Merry called up. ’What are you looking 
for? Do you miss the East Wind?’ 


country of Hollin in many seasons. No folk dwell here now, but many other 
creatures live here at all times, especially birds. Yet now all things but 
you are silent. I can feel it. There is no sound for miles about us, and 


Gandalf looked up with sudden interest. 'But what do you guess is the 
reason?’ he asked. 'Is there more in it than surprise at seeing four 

heard?’ 


watchfulness, and of fear, that I have never had here before.’ 

"Then we must be more careful,’ said Gandalf. ’If you bring a Ranger 

Aragorn. We must stop talking aloud, rest quietly, and set the watch.’ 

It was Sam’s turn that day to take the first watch, but Aragorn joined 
him. The others fell asleep. Then the silence grew until even Sam felt it. 


pony’s tail and the occasional movements of his feet became loud noises. Sam 
could hear his own joints creaking, if he stirred. Dead silence was around 




him, and over all hung a clear blue sky, as the Sun rode up from the East. 

flying smoke in the wind. 


whisper to Aragorn. He made no answer, he was gazing intently at the sky; 
but before long Sam could see for himself what was approaching. Flocks of 
birds, flying at great speed, were wheeling and circling, and traversing all 

drawing nearer. 


of a holly -bush; for a whole regiment of birds had broken away suddenly from 
the main host, and came, flying low, straight towards the ridge. Sam thought 
they were a kind of crow of large size. As they passed overhead, in so dense 

harsh croak was heard. 


sky was again clear would Aragorn rise. Then he sprang up and went and 


'Regiments of black crows are flying over all the land between the 
Mountains and the Greyflood,' he said, 'and they have passed over Hollin. 
They are not natives here; they are crebain out of Fangorn and Dunland. I do 

which they are fleeing; but I think they are spying out the land. I have 
also glimpsed many hawks flying high up in the sky. I think we ought to move 
again this evening. Hollin is no longer wholesome for us: it is being 



can get over that without being seen, I cannot imagine. But we will think of 
that when we must. As for moving as soon as it is dark, I am afraid that you 


'Luckily our fire made little smoke, and had burned low before the 


'Well if that isn't a plague and a nuisance!' said Pippin. The news: no 
fire, and a move again by night, had been broken to him, as soon as he woke 
in the late afternoon. 'All because of a pack of crows! I had looked forward 


'Well, you can go on looking forward,' said Gandalf. 'There may be many 




unexpected feasts ahead for you. For myself I should like a pipe to smoke in 

it will get warmer as we get south.' 

'Too warm, I shouldn't wonder,' muttered Sam to Frodo. 'But I'm 

the end of the Road, so to speak. I thought at first that this here Redhorn, 
or whatever its name is, might be it, till Gimli spoke his piece. A fair 
jaw-cracker dwarf-language must be!' Maps conveyed nothing to Sam's mind, 

out of his reckoning. 


now and again; but as the westering Sun grew red they disappeared 
southwards. At dusk the Company set out, and turning now half east they 

red in the last light of the vanished Sun. One by one white stars sprang 


Guided by Aragorn they struck a good path. It looked to Frodo like the 
remains of an ancient road, that had once been broad and well planned, from 
Hollin to the mountain-pass. The Moon, now at the full, rose over the 

Many of them looked to have been worked by hands, though now they lay 
tumbled and ruinous in a bleak, barren land. 


was low. Frodo looked up at the sky. Suddenly he saw or felt a shadow pass 
over the high stars, as if for a moment they faded and then flashed out 


'Did you see anything pass over?' he whispered to Gandalf, who was just 


'No, but I felt it, whatever it was,' he answered. 'It may be nothing, 


'It was moving fast then,' muttered Aragorn, 'and not with the wind.' 


brighter than before. But the air was chill again; already the wind was 
turning back towards the east. For two more nights they marched on, climbing 
steadily but ever more slowly as their road wound up into the hills, and the 

before them, a mighty peak, tipped with snow like silver, but with sheer 




naked sides, dull red as if stained with blood. 


gone now round to the north-east. Gandalf snuffed the air and looked back. 

'Winter deepens behind us,' he said quietly to Aragorn. 'The heights 

shoulders. Tonight we shall be on our way high up towards the Redhorn Gate. 
We may well be seen by watchers on that narrow path, and waylaid by some 
evil; but the weather may prove a more deadly enemy than any. What do you 


Frodo overheard these words, and understood that Gandalf and Aragorn 

anxiously. 


Gandalf,' answered Aragorn. 'And perils known and unknown will grow as we 


on. But we must go on; and it is no good our delaying the passage of the 
mountains. Further south there are no passes, till one comes to the Gap of 



side now the marshals of the Horse-lords serve?’ 

'Who knows indeed!' said Gandalf. 'But there is another way, and not by 


'But let us not speak of it again! Not yet. Say nothing to the others I 
beg, not until it is plain that there is no other way.' 



'Then let us weigh the matter in our minds, while the others rest and 


In the late afternoon, while the others were finishing their breakfast, 

Gandalf and Aragorn went aside together and stood looking at Caradhras. Its 
sides were now dark and sullen, and its head was in grey cloud. Frodo 



the Company Gandalf spoke, and then he knew that it had been decided to face 
the weather and the high pass. He was relieved. He could not guess what was 
the other dark and secret way, but the very mention of it had seemed to fill 


'From signs that we have seen lately,’ said Gandalf, ’I fear that the 




Redhorn Gate may be watched; and also I have doubts of the weather that is 
coming up behind. Snow may come. We must go with all the speed that we 



pass. Dark will come early this evening. We must leave as soon as you can 


'I will add a word of advice, if I may,' said Boromir. 'I was born 
under the shadow of the White Mountains and know something of journeys 


the high places. We shall meet bitter cold, if no worse, before we come down 

to death. When we leave here, where there are still a few trees and bushes, 
each of us should carry a faggot of wood, as large as he can bear.' 

'And Bill could take a bit more, couldn't you lad?' said Sam. The pony 


'Very well,' said Gandalf. 'But we must not use the wood — not unless 


The Company set out again with good speed at first; but soon their way 

places almost disappeared, and was blocked with many fallen stones. The 
night grew deadly dark under great clouds. A bitter wind swirled among the 
rocks. By midnight they had climbed to the knees of the great mountains. The 

the grim flanks of Caradhras towered up invisible in the gloom; on the right 
was a gulf of darkness where the land fell suddenly into a deep ravine. 

Laboriously they climbed a sharp slope and halted for a moment at the 

white flakes of snow settling on his sleeve. 

They went on. But before long the snow was falling fast, filling all 

Aragorn only a pace or two ahead could hardly be seen. 

'I don't like this at all,' panted Sam just behind. 'Snow's all right 

lot would go off to Hobbiton! Folk might welcome it there.' Except on the 
high moors of the Northfarthing a heavy fall was rare in the Shire, and was 
regarded as a pleasant event and a chance for fun. No living hobbit (save 





invaded 



Gandalf halted. Snow was thick on his hood and shoulders; it was 


"This is what I feared,' he said. 'What do you say now, Aragorn?' 



I knew the risk of snow, though it seldom falls heavily so far south, save 
high up in the mountains. But we are not high yet; we are still far down, 


'I wonder if this is a contrivance of the Enemy,' said Boromir. "They 
say in my land that he can govern the storms in the Mountains of Shadow that 
stand upon the borders of Mordor. He has strange powers and many allies.' 


from the North to trouble us here three hundred leagues away.' 




until it almost ceased. They tramped on again. But they had not gone more 
than a furlong when the storm returned with fresh fury. The wind whistled 

keep going. The hobbits, bent nearly double, toiled along behind the taller 
folk, but it was plain that they could not go much further, if the snow 
continued. Frodo's feet felt like lead. Pippin was dragging behind. Even 


The Company halted suddenly, as if they had come to an agreement 
without any words being spoken. They heard eerie noises in the darkness 
round them. It may have been only a trick of the wind in the cracks and 

wild howls of laughter. Stones began to fall from the mountain-side, 
whistling over their heads, or crashing on the path beside them. Every now 

hidden heights above. 


wind who will; there are fell voices on the air; and these stones are aimed 


'I do call it the wind,' said Aragorn. 'But that does not make what you 
say untrue. There are many evil and unfriendly things in the world that have 




little love for those that go on two legs, and yet are not in league with 



’Caradhras was called the Cruel, and had an ill name, said Gimli, 'long 
years ago, when rumour of Sauron had not been heard in these lands.' 

'It matters little who is the enemy, if we cannot beat off his attack; 


'But what can we do?' cried Pippin miserably. He was leaning on Merry 


'Either stop where we are, or go back,' said Gandalf. ’It is no good 

cliff and runs into a wide shallow trough at the bottom of a long hard 
slope. We should have no shelter there from snow, or stones — or anything 


'And it is no good going back while the storm holds,' said Aragorn. 'We 

cliff-wall we are under now.' 


make a house.' 



It faced southwards, and near the bottom it leaned out a little, so that 
they hoped it would give them some protection from the northerly wind and 
from the falling stones. But eddying blasts swirled round them from every 


They huddled together with their backs to the wall. Bill the pony stood 
patiently but dejectedly in front of the hobbits, and screened them a 

on mounting. If they had had no larger companions the hobbits would soon 


A great sleepiness came over Frodo; he felt himself sinking fast into a 
warm and hazy dream. He thought a fire was heating his toes, and out of the 
shadows on the other side of the hearth he heard Bilbo's voice speaking. / 

there was no need to come back to report that! 

But I wanted rest and sleep, Bilbo , Frodo answered with an effort, when 

had lifted him off the ground out of a nest of snow. 




'This will be the death of the halflings, Gandalf,' said Boromir. 'It 

something to save ourselves.’ 

'Give them this,’ said Gandalf, searching in his pack and drawing out a 


It is miruvor, the cordial of Imladris. Elrond gave it to me at our parting. 



As soon as Frodo had swallowed a little of the warm and fragrant liquor 
he felt a new strength of heart, and the heavy drowsiness left his limbs. 

The others also revived and found fresh hope and vigour. But the snow did 



’What do you say to fire?’ asked Boromir suddenly. ’The choice seems 
near now between fire and death, Gandalf. Doubtless we shall be hidden from 
all unfriendly eyes when the snow has covered us, but that will not help 



watchers that can endure this storm, then they can see us, fire or no.’ But 
though they had brought wood and kindlings by the advice of Boromir, it 
passed the skill of Elf or even Dwarf to strike a flame that would hold amid 
the swirling wind or catch in the wet fuel. At last reluctantly Gandalf 

then with a word of command, naur an edraith ammen ! he thrust the end of his 
staff into the midst of it. At once a great spout of green and blue flame 


'If there are any to see, then I at least am revealed to them,’ he 
said. ’I have written Gandalf is here in signs that all can read from 


But the Company cared no longer for watchers or unfriendly eyes. Their 
hearts were rejoiced to see the light of the fire. The wood burned merrily; 

their feet, they warmed their hands gladly at the blaze. There they stood, 
stooping in a circle round the little dancing and blowing flames. A red 
light was on their tired and anxious faces; behind them the night was like a 




The fire burned low. and the last faggot was thrown on. 




The night is getting old,' said Aragorn. "The dawn is not far off.' 



Boromir stepped out of the circle and stared up into the blackness. 

'The snow is growing less,' he said, 'and the wind is quieter.' 


revealed white for a moment in the light of the dying fire; but for a long 
time he could see no sign of their slackening. Then suddenly, as sleep was 
beginning to creep over him again, he was aware that the wind had indeed 

light began to grow. At last the snow stopped altogether. 

As the light grew stronger it showed a silent shrouded world. Below 

the path that they had trodden was altogether lost; but the heights above 
were hidden in great clouds still heavy with the threat of snow. 


said. 'He has more snow yet to fling at us, if we go on. The sooner we go 



prove impossible. Only a few paces from the ashes of their fire the snow lay 
many feet deep, higher than the heads of the hobbits; in places it had been 


'If Gandalf would go before us with a bright flame, he might melt a 
path for you,' said Legolas. The storm had troubled him little, and he alone 


'If Elves could fly over mountains, they might fetch the Sun to save 
us,’ answered Gandalf. 'But I must have something to work on. I cannot burn 


'Well,' said Boromir, 'when heads are at a loss bodies must serve, as 

is now snow-clad, our path, as we came up, turned about that shoulder of 
rock down yonder. It was there that the snow first began to burden us. If we 
could reach that point, maybe it would prove easier beyond. It is no more 


'Then let us force a path thither, you and I!’ said Aragorn. 


height, was broader and heavier in build. He led the way, and Aragorn 
followed him. Slowly they moved off, and were soon toiling heavily. In 




places the snow was breast-high, and often Boromir seemed to be swimming 




Legolas watched them for a while with a smile upon his lips, and then 
he turned to the others. 'The strongest must seek a way, say you? But I say: 

light over grass and leaf or over snow-an Elf.' 

With that he sprang forth nimbly, and then Frodo noticed as if for the 

only light shoes, as he always did, and his feet made little imprint in the 


'Farewell!' he said to Gandalf. 'I go to find the Sun!' Then swift as a 
runner over firm sand he shot away, and quickly overtaking the toiling men, 
with a wave of his hand he passed them, and sped into the distance, and 


The others waited huddled together, watching until Boromir and Aragorn 

sight. The time dragged on. The clouds lowered, and now a few flakes of snow 


An hour, maybe, went by, though it seemed far longer, and then at last 
they saw Legolas coming back. At the same time Boromir and Aragorn 
reappeared round the bend far behind him and came labouring up the slope. 


walking in the blue fields of the South, and a little wreath of snow on this 
Redhorn hillock troubles her not at all. But I have brought back a gleam of 
good hope for those who are doomed to go on feet. There is the greatest 

buried. They despaired, until I returned and told them that the drift was 
little wider than a wall. And on the other side the snow suddenly grows 
less, while further down it is no more than a white coverlet to cool a 



the ill will of Caradhras. He does not love Elves and Dwarves, and that 
drift was laid to cut off our escape.' 


said Boromir, who came up at that moment. 'And doughty Men too, if I may 





it; though lesser men with spades might have served you better. Still, we 
have thrust a lane through the drift; and for that all here may be grateful 


'But how are we to get down there, even if you have cut through the 


'Have hope!' said Boromir. 'I am weary, but I still have some strength 
left, and Aragorn too. We will bear the little folk. The others no doubt 
will make shift to tread the path behind us. Come, Master Peregrin! I will 



said and strode forward. Aragorn with Merry came behind. Pippin marvelled at 
his strength, seeing the passage that he had already forced with no other 
tool than his great limbs. Even now, burdened as he was, he was widening the 


They came at length to the great drift. It was flung across the 
mountain-path like a sheer and sudden wall, and its crest, sharp as if 
shaped with knives, reared up more than twice the height of Boromir; but 

bridge. On the far side Merry and Pippin were set down, and there they 
waited with Legolas for the rest of the Company to arrive. 


now well-trodden track came Gandalf, leading Bill with Gimli perched among 
the baggage. Last came Aragorn carrying Frodo. They passed through the lane; 
but hardly had Frodo touched the ground when with a deep rumble there rolled 

Company as they crouched against the cliff, and when the air cleared again 
they saw that the path was blocked behind them. 


And indeed with that last stroke the malice of the mountain seemed to be 
expended, as if Caradhras was satisfied that the invaders had been beaten 
off and would not dare to return. The threat of snow lifted; the clouds 


As Legolas had reported, they found that the snow became steadily more 
shallow as they went down, so that even the hobbits could trudge along. Soon 

where they had felt the first flakes of snow the night before. 

The morning was now far advanced. From the high place they looked back 




westwards over the lower lands. Far away in the tumble of country that lay 



Frodo’s legs ached. He was chilled to the bone and hungry; and his head 
was dizzy as he thought of the long and painful march downhill. Black specks 
swam before his eyes. He rubbed them, but the black specks remained. In the 

circling in the air. 



That cannot be helped now,’ said Gandalf. 'Whether they are good or 
evil, or have nothing to do with us at all, we must go down at once. Not 


A cold wind flowed down behind them, as they turned their backs on the 
Redhorn Gate, and stumbled wearily down the slope. Caradhras had defeated 









It was evening, and the grey light was again waning fast, when they 
halted for the night. They were very weary. The mountains were veiled in 
deepening dusk, and the wind was cold. Gandalf spared them one more 





'We cannot, of course, go on again tonight,' he said. 'The attack on 
the Redhorn Gate has tired us out, and we must rest here for a while.' 



'We still have our journey and our errand before us,' answered Gandalf. 

'We have no choice but to go on, or to return to Rivendell.' 


Rivendell; Merry and Sam looked up hopefully. But Aragorn and Boromir 


no sign. Frodo looked troubled. 


— unless there is indeed no other way, and we are already defeated? ’ 

'You are right, Frodo,' said Gandalf: 'to go back is to admit defeat 
and face worse defeat to come. If we go back now, then the Ring must remain 

will be besieged, and after a brief and bitter time it will be destroyed. 

The Ringwraiths are deadly enemies, but they are only shadows yet of the 
power and terror they would possess if the Ruling Ring was on their master's 



sank back into gloom. 


beginning, when first I considered this journey, that we should try it. But 
it is not a pleasant way, and I have not spoken of it to the Company before. 
Aragorn was against it, until the pass over the mountains had at least been 


'If it is a worse road than the Redhorn Gate, then it must be evil 





the worst at once.' 



Only Gimli lifted up his head; a smouldering fire was in his eyes. On all 
the others a dread fell at the mention of that name. Even to the hobbits it 


'The road may lead to Moria, but how can we hope that it will lead 


'It is a name of ill omen,' said Boromir. 'Nor do I see the need to go 
there. If we cannot cross the mountains, let us journey southwards, until we 

road that I followed on my way hither. Or we might pass by and cross the 
Isen into Langstrand and Lebennin, and so come to Gondor from the regions 


'Things have changed since you came north, Boromir,' answered Gandalf. 
'Did you not hear what I told you of Saruman? With him I may have business 

can by any means be prevented. The Gap of Rohan is closed to us while we go 


'As for the longer road: we cannot afford the time. We might spend a 
year in such a journey, and we should pass through many lands that are empty 
and harbourless. Yet they would not be safe. The watchful eyes both of 



in the Enemy's eyes only one stray wanderer from the South and a matter of 
small concern to him: his mind was busy with the pursuit of the Ring. But 
you return now as a member of the Ring's Company, and you are in peril as 

we go south under the naked sky. 


desperate, I fear. I see now little hope, if we do not soon vanish from 
sight for a while, and cover our trail. Therefore I advise that we should go 
neither over the mountains, nor round them, but under them. That is a road 


'We do not know what he expects,' said Boromir. 'lie may watch all 
roads, likely and unlikely. In that case to enter Moria would be to walk 
into a trap, hardly better than knocking at the gates of the Dark Tower 






'You speak of what you do not know, when you liken Moria to the 

the dungeons of the Dark Lord, and only in his older and lesser dwelling in 
Dol Guldur. Those who pass the gates of Barad-dyr do not return. But I would 
not lead you into Moria if there were no hope of coming out again. If there 

of the Misty Mountains were scattered or destroyed in the Battle of Five 
Armies. The Eagles report that Ores are gathering again from afar; but there 


'There is even a chance that Dwarves are there, and that in some deep 
hall of his fathers, Balin son of Fundin may be found. However it may prove, 


’I will tread the path with you, Gandalf! ’ said Gimli. ’I will go and 
look on the halls of Durin, whatever may wait there-if you can find the 


'Good, Gimli! ' said Gandalf. 'You encourage me. We will seek the 

Dwarves, a dwarfs head will be less easy to bewilder than Elves or Men or 
Hobbits. Yet it will not be the first time that I have been to Moria. I 
sought there long for Thrbin son of Thrur after he was lost. I passed 


'I too once passed the Dimrill Gate,' said Aragorn quietly; 'but though 
I also came out again, the memory is very evil. I do not wish to enter Moria 




'Nor me,' muttered Sam. 


will follow me, if I lead you there? ' 



'I will,' said Aragorn heavily. 'You followed my lead almost to 

lead now — if this last warning does not move you. It is not of the Ring, 
nor of us others that I am thinking now, but of you, Gandalf. And I say to 


'I will not go,' said Boromir; 'not unless the vote of the whole 
company is against me. What do Legolas and the little folk say? The 






I do not wish to go to Moria,' said Legolas. 

The hobbits said nothing. Sam looked at Frodo. At last Frodo spoke. 'I 

Gandalf. I beg that there should be no vote, until we have slept on it. 
Gandalf will get votes easier in the light of the morning than in this cold 


At these words all fell into silent thought. They heard the wind 
hissing among the rocks and trees, and there was a howling and wailing round 


Suddenly Aragorn leapt to his feet. 'How the wind howls ! ' he cried. 



f 


hunt is up! Even if we live to see the dawn, who now will wish to journey 
south by night with the wild wolves on his trail? ’ 



'There was a door south-west of Caradhras, some fifteen miles as the 


'Then let us start as soon as it is light tomorrow, if we can,' said 
Boromir. 'The wolf that one hears is worse than the ore that one fears.' 

'True!' said Aragorn, loosening his sword in its sheath. 'But where the 


'I wish I had taken Elrond's advice,' muttered Pippin to Sam. I am no 

in me: these howls freeze my blood. I don't ever remember feeling so 


'My heart's right down in my toes, Mr. Pippin,' said Sam. 'But we 
aren't etten yet, and there are some stout folk here with us. Whatever may 


For their defence in the night the Company climbed to the top of the 
small hill under which they had been sheltering, it was crowned with a knot 
of old and twisted trees, about which lay a broken circle of boulder stones. 


and silence would keep their trail from discovery by the hunting packs. 

Round the fire they sat, and those that were not on guard dozed 
uneasily. Poor Bill the pony trembled and sweated where he stood. The 







further off. In the dead of the night many shining eyes were seen peering 
over the brow of the hill. Some advanced almost to the ring of stones. At a 
gap in the circle a great dark wolf-shape could be seen halted, gazing at 

his pack to the assault. 



Hound of Sauron! ’ he cried. 'Gandalf is here. Fly, if you value your foul 
skin! I will shrivel you from tail to snout, if you come within this ring.' 

The wolf snarled and sprang towards them with a great leap. At that 

hideous yell, and the leaping shape thudded to the ground; the elvish arrow 
had pierced its throat. The watching eyes were suddenly extinguished. 
Gandalf and Aragorn strode forward, but the hill was deserted; the hunting 

the sighing wind. 


fitfully through the breaking clouds. Suddenly Frodo started from sleep. 
Without warning a storm of howls broke out fierce and wild all about the 
camp. A great host of Wargs had gathered silently and was now attacking them 


'Fling fuel on the fire!’ cried Gandalf to the hobbits. 'Draw your 


In the leaping light, as the fresh wood blazed up, Frodo saw many grey 

throat of one huge leader Aragorn passed his sword with a thrust; with a 
great sweep Boromir hewed the head off another. Beside them Gimli stood 


his stout legs apart, wielding his dwarf-axe. The bow of Legolas was 



a great menacing shape like the monument of some ancient king of stone set 
upon a hill. Stooping like a cloud, he lifted a burning branch and strode to 
meet the wolves. They gave back before him. High in the air he tossed the 

his voice rolled like thunder. 






There was a roar and a crackle, and the tree above him burst into a 
leaf and bloom of blinding flame. The fire leapt from tree-top to tree -top. 

The whole hill was crowned with dazzling light. The swords and knives of the 

as it flew, and plunged burning into the heart of a great wolf-chieftain. 



Slowly the fire died till nothing was left but falling ash and sparks; 
a bitter smoke curled above the burned tree-stumps, and blew darkly from the 
hill, as the first light of dawn came dimly in the sky. Their enemies were 


'What did I tell you, Mr. Pippin? ' said Sam, she/thing his sword. 


the hair off my head!’ 


be found, and they looked in vain for the bodies of the dead. No trace of 
the fight remained but the charred trees and the arrows of Legolas lying on 
the hill-top. All were undamaged save one of which only the point was left. 


hunting for food in the wilderness. Let us eat quickly and go!’ 

That day the weather changed again, almost as if it was at the command 
of some power that had no longer any use for snow, since they had retreated 

that moved in the wild could be seen from far away. The wind had been 
turning through north to north-west during the night, and now it failed. The 
clouds vanished southwards and the sky was opened, high and blue. As they 

mountain-tops. 


shall not reach them at all. It is not far, but our path may be winding, for 
here Aragorn cannot guide us; he has seldom walked in this country, and only 
once have I been under the west wall of Moria, and that was long ago. 


mountains' sides fell sheer into the shadows at their feet. In the distance 
could be dimly seen a line of bare cliffs, and in their midst, taller than 
the rest, one great grey wall. 'When we left the pass I led you southwards, 





well that I did so, for now we have several miles less to cross, and haste 


'I do not know which to hope,' said Boromir grimly: 'that Gandalf will 
find what he seeks, or that coming to the cliff we shall find the gates lost 
for ever. All choices seem ill, and to be caught between wolves and the wall 


Gimli now walked ahead by the wizard’s side, so eager was he to come to 
Moria. Together they led the Company back towards the mountains. The only 

the Sirannon, that ran out from the feet of the cliffs near where the doors 
had stood. But either Gandalf was astray, or else the land had changed in 
recent years; for he did not strike the stream where he looked to find it, 


The morning was passing towards noon, and still the Company wandered 
and scrambled in a barren country of red stones. Nowhere could they see any 

sank. They saw no living thing, and not a bird was in the sky; but what the 
night would bring, if it caught them in that lost land, none of them cared 


Suddenly Gimli, who had pressed on ahead, called back to them. He was 

them a deep and narrow channel. It was empty and silent, and hardly a 
trickle of water flowed among the brown and red-stained stones of its bed; 
but on the near side there was a path, much broken and decayed, that wound 


’Ah! Here it is at last! ' said Gandalf. 'This is where the stream ran: 

Sirannon, the Gate-stream, they used to call it. But what has happened to 
the water, I cannot guess; it used to be swift and noisy. Come! We must 


The Company were footsore and tired; but they trudged doggedly along 

began to go west. After a brief halt and a hasty meal they went on again. 
Before them the mountains frowned, but their path lay in a deep trough of 
land and they could see only the higher shoulders and the far eastward 



veering southwards between the brink of the channel and a steep fall of the 




land to the left, turned and went due east again. Rounding the corner they 
saw before them a low cliff, some five fathoms high, with a broken and 

seemed to have been carved out by a fall that had once been strong and full. 

'Indeed things have changed! ' said Gandalf. 'But there is no mistaking 
the place. There is all that remains of the Stair Falls. If I remember 

main road wound away left and climbed with several loops up to the level 
ground at the top. There used to be a shallow valley beyond the falls right 
up to the Walls of Moria, and the Sirannon flowed through it with the road 


They found the stone steps without difficulty, and Gimli sprang swiftly 
up them, followed by Gandalf and Frodo. When they reached the top they saw 
that they could go no further that way, and the reason for the drying up of 

western sky with glimmering gold. Before them stretched a dark still lake. 
Neither sky nor sunset was reflected on its sullen surface. The Sirannon had 
been dammed and had filled all the valley. Beyond the ominous water were 

impassable. No sign of gate or entrance, not a fissure or crack could Frodo 


'There are the Walls of Moria,' said Gandalf, pointing across the 
water. 'And there the Gate stood once upon a time, the Elven Door at the end 
of the road from Flollin by which we have come. But this way is blocked. None 

the day. It has an unwholesome look.’ 

'We must find a way round the northern edge,' said Gimli. 'The first 

that will lead us. Even if there were no lake, we could not get our 


'But in any case we cannot take the poor beast into the Mines,’ said 
Gandalf. 'The road under the mountains is a dark road, and there are places 


'Poor old Bill! ' said Frodo. 'I had not thought of that. And poor Sam! 



'I am sorry,' said Gandalf. 'Poor Bill has been a useful companion and 
it goes to my heart to turn him adrift now. I would have travelled lighter 




and brought no animal, least of all this one that Sam is fond of, if I had 
had my way. I feared all along that we should be obliged to take this road.’ 


high above the sunset, when the Company, with all the speed they could, 
climbed up the slopes and reached the side of the lake. In breadth it looked 
to be no more than two or three furlongs at the widest point. How far it 

northern end was no more than half a mile from where they stood, and between 
the stony ridges that enclosed the valley and the water's edge there was a 
rim of open ground. They hurried forward, for they had still a mile or two 

making for; and then he had still to find the doors. 

When they came to the northernmost corner of the lake they found a 

like a slimy arm towards the enclosing hills. Gimli strode forward 
undeterred, and found that the water was shallow, no more than ankle-deep at 
the edge. Behind him they walked in file, threading their way with care, for 

treacherous. Frodo shuddered with disgust at the touch of the dark unclean 


As Sam, the last of the Company, led Bill up on to the dry ground on 
the far side, there came a soft sound: a swish, followed by a plop, as if a 

ripples, black-edged with shadow in the waning light: great rings were 
widening outwards from a point far out in the lake. There was a bubbling 
noise, and then silence. The dusk deepened, and the last gleams of the 


Gandalf now pressed on at a great pace, and the others followed as 

and the cliffs: it was narrow, often hardly a dozen yards across, and 
encumbered with fallen rock and stones; but they found a way, hugging the 
cliff, and keeping as far from the dark water as they might. A mile 

boughs were rotting in the shallows, the remains it seemed of old thickets, 
or of a hedge that had once lined the road across the drowned valley. But 
close under the cliff there stood, still strong and living, . two tall 





Their great roots spread from the wall to the water. Under the looming 
cliffs they had looked like mere bushes, when seen far off from the top of 
the Stair; but now they towered overhead, stiff, dark, and silent, throwing 

end of the road. 


Hollin ended. Holly was the token of the people of that land, and they 
planted it here to mark the end of their domain; for the West -door was made 

happier days, when there was still close friendship at times between folk of 
different race, even between Dwarves and Elves.' 


Gimli. 



'I have heard both,' said Gandalf; 'and I will not give judgement now. 

But I beg you two, Legolas and Gimli, at least to be friends, and to help 
me. I need you both. The doors are shut and hidden, and the sooner we find 


Turning to the others he said: 'While I am searching, will you each 

good beast of burden. You must lay aside much of the stuff that we brought 
against bitter weather: you will not need it inside, nor, I hope, when we 
come through and journey on down into the South. Instead each of us must 



'But you can't leave poor old Bill behind in this forsaken place, Mr. 
Gandalf! ' cried Sam, angry and distressed. 'I won't have it, and that's 


'I am sorry, Sam,' said the wizard. 'But when the Door opens I do not 
think you will be able to drag your Bill inside, into the long dark of 


'He'd follow Mr. Frodo into a dragon's den, if I led him,' protested 
Sam. 'It'd be nothing short of murder to turn him loose with all these 


'It will be short of murder, I hope,' said Gandalf. He laid his hand on 

guiding on you,’ he said. 'You are a wise beast, and have learned much in 




Rivendell. Make your ways to places where you can find grass, and so come in 
time to Elrond's house, or wherever you wish to go. 


getting home as we have.’ 


understand well what was going on, nuzzled up to him, putting his nose to 
Sam's ear. Sam burst into tears, and fumbled with the straps, unlading all 
the pony's packs and throwing them on the ground. The others sorted out the 



When this was done they turned to watch Gandalf. He appeared to have 
done nothing. He was standing between the two trees gazing at the blank wall 
of the cliff, as if he would bore a hole into it with his eyes. Gimli was 

pressed against the rock, as if listening. 

'Well, here we are and all ready,' said Merry; 'but where are the 


'Dwarf-doors are not made to be seen when shut,' said Gimli. 'They are 

secret is forgotten.' 


Gandalf, coming suddenly to life and turning round. 'Unless things are 
altogether changed, eyes that know what to look for may discover the signs.’ 

He walked forward to the wall. Right between the shadow of the trees 

muttering words under his breath. Then he stepped back. 



The Moon now shone upon the grey face of the rock; but they could see 
nothing else for a while. Then slowly on the surface, where the wizard's 
hands had passed, faint lines appeared, like slender veins of silver running 

that they only twinkled fitfully where the Moon caught them, but steadily 
they grew broader and clearer, until their design could be guessed. 

At the top, as high as Gandalf could reach, was an arch of interlacing 

blurred or broken, the outline could be seen of an anvil and a hammer 




surmounted by a crown with seven stars. Beneath these again were two trees, 
each bearing crescent moons. More clearly than all else there shone forth in 


'There are the emblems of Dunn!' cried Gimli. 



'And the Star of the House of Flanor,' said Gandalf. 'They are wrought 
of ithildin that mirrors only starlight and moonlight, and sleeps until it 
is touched by one who speaks words now long forgotten in Middle-earth. It is 



’What does the writing say?’ asked Frodo, who was trying to decipher 
the inscription on the arch. ’I thought I knew the elf-letters but I cannot 


'The words are in the elven-tongue of the West of Middle-earth in the 
Elder Days,’ answered Gandalf. ’But they do not say anything of importance 

enter. And underneath small and faint is written: I, Narvi, made them. 
Celebrimbor ofHollin drew these signs.' 



’That is plain enough,’ said Gimli. 'If you are a friend, speak the 
password, and the doors will open, and you can enter.’ 


dwarf-gates will open only at special times, or for particular persons; and 
some have locks and keys that are still needed when all necessary times and 
words are known. These doors have no key. In the days of Durin they were not 

shut, any who knew the opening word could speak it and pass in. At least so 


'It is,' said the dwarf. 'But what the word was is not remembered. 

Narvi and his craft and all his kindred have vanished from the earth.’ 

’But do not you know the word, Gandalf? ’ asked Boromir in surprise. 



The others looked dismayed; only Aragorn, who knew Gandalf well, 


’Then what was the use of bringing us to this accursed spot?’ cried 

you had once passed through the Mines. How could that be, if you did not 






'The answer to your first question, Boromir,’ said the wizard, 'is that 
I do not know the word-yet. But we shall soon see. And,’ he added, with a 
glint in his eyes under their bristling brows, 'you may ask what is the use 

doubt my tale? Or have you no wits left? I did not enter this way. I came 


'If you wish to know, I will tell you that these doors open outwards. 

From the inside you may thrust them open with your hands. From the outside 
nothing will move them save the spell of command. They cannot be forced 



wizard's bristling brows. 


if that does not shatter them, and I am allowed a little peace from foolish 
questions, I will seek for the opening words. 


that was ever used for such a purpose. I can still remember ten score of 
them without searching in my mind. But only a few trials, I think, will be 
needed; and I shall not have to call on Gimli for words of the secret 

the writing on the arch: that seems certain.' 

Ele stepped up to the rock again, and lightly touched with his staff the 




Fennas nogothrim, lasto beth lammen! 

he said in a commanding voice. The silver lines faded, but the blank 


Many times he repeated these words in different order, or varied them. 

louder, now soft and slow. Then he spoke many single words of Elvish speech. 
Nothing happened. The cliff towered into the night, the countless stars were 


Again Gandalf approached the wall, and lifting up his arms he spoke in 
tones of command and rising wrath. Edro, edro! he cried, and struck the rock 
with his staff. Open, open! he shouted, and followed it with the same 





Middle-earth. Then he threw his staff on the ground, and sat down in 


At that moment from far off the wind bore to their listening ears the 
howling of wolves. Bill the pony started in fear, and Sam sprang to his side 


'Do not let him run away! ' said Boromir. 'It seems that we shall need 

stooped and picking up a large stone he cast it far into the dark water. 

The stone vanished with a soft slap; but at the same instant there was 
a swish and a bubble. Great rippling rings formed on the surface out beyond 



’Why did you do that, Boromir? ' said Frodo. V I hate this place, too, 
and I am afraid. I don't know of what: not of wolves, or the dark behind the 
doors, but of something else. I am afraid of the pool. Don't disturb it! ' 



'Why doesn't Gandalf do something quick? ' said Pippin. 


despair or in anxious thought. The mournful howling of the wolves was heard 
again. The ripples on the water grew and came closer; some were already 


With a suddenness that startled them all the wizard sprang to his feet. 

He was laughing! V I have it! ' he cried. 'Of course, of course! Absurdly 


Picking up his staff he stood before the rock and said in a clear 


The star shone out briefly and faded again. Then silently a great 
doorway was outlined, though not a crack or joint had been visible before. 

doors lay back against the wall. Through the opening a shadowy stair could 
be seen climbing steeply up; but beyond the lower steps the darkness was 


V I was wrong after all,' said Gandalf, 'and Gimli too. Merry, of all 
people, was on the right track. The opening word was inscribed on the 
archway all the time! The translation should have been: Say "Friend" and 

Quite simple. Too simple for a learned lore-master in these suspicious days. 




Those were happier times. Now let us go!' 


moment several things happened. Frodo felt something seize him by the ankle, 
and he fell with a cry. Bill the pony gave a wild neigh of fear, and turned 
tail and dashed away along the lakeside into the darkness. Sam leaped after 

The others swung round and saw the waters of the lake seething, as if a host 
of snakes were swimming up from the southern end. 


pale-green and luminous and wet. Its fingered end had hold of Frodo's foot 
and was dragging him into the water. Sam on his knees was now slashing at it 


The arm let go of Frodo, and Sam pulled him away, crying out for help. 

hideous stench. 


back. Rousing them from the horror that seemed to have rooted all but Sam to 
the ground where they stood, he drove them forward. 


Gandalf had just begun to climb, when the groping tentacles writhed across 
the narrow shore and fingered the cliff- wall and the doors. One came 
wriggling over the threshold, glistening in the starlight. Gandalf turned 

within, there was no need. Many coiling arms seized the doors on either 
side, and with horrible strength, swung them round. With a shattering echo 
they slammed, and all light was lost. A noise of rending and crashing came 


Sam, clinging to Frodo’s arm, collapsed on a step in the black 

Wolves and snakes! But the snakes were too much for him. I had to choose, 


They heard Gandalf go back down the steps and thrust his staff against 
the doors. There was a quiver in the stone and the stairs trembled, .but the 
doors did not open. 'Well, well! ’ said the wizard. 'The passage is blocked 
behind us now and there is only one way out— on the other side of the 

trees uprooted and thrown across the gate. I am sorry; for the trees were 






'I felt that something horrible was near from the moment that my foot 
first touched the water,' said Frodo. 'What was the thing, or were there 


'I do not know,' answered Gandalf, 'but the arms were all guided by one 
purpose. Something has crept, or has been driven out of dark waters under 

places of the world.' He did not speak aloud his thought that whatever it 
was that dwelt in the lake, it had seized on Frodo first among all the 


Boromir muttered under his breath, but the echoing stone magnified the 

world! And thither we are going against my wish. Who will lead us nowin 


'I will,' said Gandalf, 'and Gimli shall walk with me. Follow my staff! 



As the wizard passed on ahead up the great steps, he held his staff 
aloft, and from its tip there came a faint radiance. The wide stairway was 



at the top they found an arched passage with a level floor leading on into 


'Let us sit and rest and have something to eat, here on the landing, 
since we can't find a dining-room! ' said Frodo. He had begun to shake off 


The proposal was welcomed by all; and they sat down on the upper steps, 
dim figures in the gloom. After they had eaten, Gandalf gave them each a 


'It will not last much longer, I am afraid,’ he said; 'but I think we 
need it after that horror at the gate. And unless we have great luck, we 

the water, too! There are many streams and wells in the Mines, but they 
should not be touched. We may not have a chance of filling our skins and 


'How long is that going to take us? ' asked Frodo. 

'I cannot say,' answered Gandalf. 'It depends on many chances. But 





four marches, I expect. It cannot be less than forty miles from West -door to 
East-gate in a direct line, and the road may wind much.' 

After only a brief rest they started on their way again. All were eager 

they were, to go on marching still for several hours. Gandalf walked in 
front as before. In his left hand he held up his glimmering staff, the light 
of which just showed the ground before his feet; in his right he held his 

as he turned his head from side to side. Behind the dwarf walked Frodo, and 
he had drawn the short sword, Sting. No gleam came from the blades of Sting 
or of Glamdring; and that was some comfort, for being the work of Elvish 

were near at hand. Behind Frodo went Sam, and after him Legolas, and the 
young hobbits, and Boromir. In the dark at the rear, grim and silent, walked 


The passage twisted round a few turns, and then began to descend. It 

air grew hot and stifling, but it was not foul, and at times they felt 
currents of cooler air upon their faces, issuing from half-guessed openings 
in the walls. There were many of these. In the pale ray of the wizard's 

tunnels, sloping up, or running steeply down, or opening blankly dark on 
either side. It was bewildering beyond hope of remembering. 

Gimli aided Gandalf very little, except by his stout courage. At least 

itself. Often the wizard consulted him at points where the choice of way was 
doubtful; but it was always Gandalf who had the final word. The Mines of 
Moria were vast and intricate beyond the imagination of Gimli, Gluin's son, 

a journey long before were now of little help, but even in the gloom and 
despite all windings of the road he knew whither he wished to go, and he did 
not falter, as long as there was a path that led towards his goal. 


and Gandalf and Gimli were whispering together; the others were crowded 
behind, waiting anxiously. 'Do not be afraid! I have been with him on many a 

greater deeds of his than any that I have seen. He will not go astray-if 




there is any path to find. He has led us in here against our fears, but he 
will lead us out again, at whatever cost to himself. He is surer of finding 


It was well for the Company that they had such a guide. They had no 
fuel nor any means of making torches; in the desperate scramble at the doors 
many things had been left behind. But without any light they would soon have 

also in many places holes and pitfalls, and dark wells beside the path in 
which their passing feet echoed. There were fissures and chasms in the walls 
and floor, and every now and then a crack would open right before their 

Pippin could summon enough courage to leap over the dreadful gap. The noise 
of churning water came up from far below, as if some great mill-wheel was 


'Rope! ' muttered Sam. 'I knew I'd want it, if I hadn't got it! ' 

As these dangers became more frequent their march became slower. 

mountains' roots. They were more than weary, and yet there seemed no comfort 
in the thought of halting anywhere. Frodo's spirits had risen for a while 
after his escape, and after food and a draught of the cordial; but now a 

healed in Rivendell of the knife-stroke, that grim wound had not been 
without effect. His senses were sharper and more aware of things that could 
not be seen. One sign of change that he soon had noticed was that he could 

he was in any case the bearer of the Ring: it hung upon its chain against 
his breast, and at whiles it seemed a heavy weight. He felt the certainty of 
evil ahead and of evil following; but he said nothing. He gripped tighter on 


The Company behind him spoke seldom, and then only in hurried whispers. 
There was no sound but the sound of their own feet; the dull stump of 

the soft, scarce-heard patter of hobbit-feet; and in the rear the slow firm 
footfalls of Aragorn with his long stride. When they halted for a moment 
they heard nothing at all, unless it were occasionally a faint trickle and 

something else: like the faint fall of soft bare feet. It was never loud 




enough, or near enough, for him to feel certain that he heard it; but once 
it had started it never stopped, while the Company was moving. But it was 

and then grew still. 


going for several hours with only brief halts, when Gandalf came to his 
first serious check. Before him stood a wide dark arch opening into three 
passages: all led in the same general direction, eastwards; but the 

middle way seemed to run on, smooth and level but very narrow. 

'I have no memory of this place at all!' said Gandalf, standing 

marks or inscription that might help his choice; but nothing of the kind was 
to be seen. I am too weary to decide,' he said, shaking his head. 'And I 
expect that you are all as weary as I am, or wearier. We had better halt 

dark; but outside the late Moon is riding westward and the middle-night has 


'Poor old Bill! ' said Sam. 'I wonder where he is. I hope those wolves 


To the left of the great arch they found a stone door: it was half 
closed, but swung back easily to a gentle thrust. Beyond there seemed to lie 


'Steady! Steady! ' cried Gandalf as Merry and Pippin pushed forward, 

shelter than in the open passage. 'Steady! You do not know what is inside 


He went in cautiously, and the others filed behind. 'There! ’ he said, 
pointing with his staff to the middle of the floor. Before his feet they saw 
a large round hole like the mouth of a well. Broken and rusty chains lay at 
the edge and trailed down into the black pit. Fragments of stone lay near. 


going to strike the bottom,' said Aragorn to Merry. 'Let the guide go first 


'This seems to have been a guardroom, made for the watching of the 
three passages,' said Gimli. 'That hole was plainly a well for the guards' 





care in the dark.' 


unrolling blankets and making beds against the walls of the chamber, as far 
as possible from the hole in the floor, he crept to the edge and peered 
over. A chill air seemed to strike his face, rising from invisible depths. 

felt his heart beat many times before there was any sound. Then far below, 
as if the stone had fallen into deep water in some cavernous place, there 
came a plunk , very distant, but magnified and repeated in the hollow shaft. 


what he had done; but he was angry, and Pippin could see his eye glinting. 
’Fool of a Took! ' he growled. 'This is a serious journey, not a hobbit 
walking -party. Throw yourself in next time, and then you will be no further 


Nothing more was heard for several minutes; but then there came out of 

had died away, they were repeated: tap-tom, tom-tap, tap-tap, tom. They 
sounded disquietingly like signals of some sort; but after a while the 


'That was the sound of a hammer, or I have never heard one,' said 


'Yes,' said Gandalf, 'and I do not like it. It may have nothing to do 
with Peregrin's foolish stone; but probably something has been disturbed 


Let us hope we shall get some rest without further trouble. You, Pippin, can 
go on the first watch, as a reward,' he growled, as he rolled himself in a 


Pippin sat miserably by the door in the pitch dark; but he kept on 

well. He wished he could cover the hole, if only with a blanket, but he 
dared not move or go near it, even though Gandalf seemed to be asleep. 

Actually Gandalf was awake, though lying still and silent. He was deep 

Mines, and considering anxiously the next course that he should take; a 
false turn now might be disastrous. After an hour he rose up and came over 


'Get into a corner and have a sleep, my lad,' he said in a kindly tone. 





watching.' 


door. 'I need smoke ! I have not tasted it since the morning before the 


The last thing that Pippin saw, as sleep took him, was a dark glimpse 
of the old wizard huddled on the floor, shielding a glowing chip in his 

nose, and the puff of smoke. 


all alone for about six hours, and had let the others rest. 'And in the 
watches I have made up my mind,' he said. 'I do not like the feel of the 
middle way; and I do not like the smell of the left-hand way: there is foul 

time we began to climb up again.' 

For eight dark hours, not counting two brief halts, they marched on; 

gleam of the wizard's light, bobbing like a will-o'-the-wisp in front of 
them. The passage they had chosen wound steadily upwards. As far as they 
could judge it went in great mounting curves, and as it rose it grew loftier 

either side, and the floor was level and sound, without pits or cracks. 
Evidently they had struck what once had been an important road; and they 


In this way they advanced some fifteen miles, measured in a direct line 
east, though they must have actually walked twenty miles or more. As the 
road climbed upwards' Frodo's spirits rose a little; but he still felt 

Company and beyond the fall and patter of their feet, a following footstep 


They had marched as far as the hobbits could endure without a rest, and 
all were thinking of a place where they could sleep, when suddenly the walls 
to right and left vanished. They seemed to have passed through some arched 

air behind them, and before them the darkness was cold on their faces. They 







are coming to the habitable parts, and I guess that we are not far now from 
the eastern side. But we are high up, a good deal higher than the Dimrill 
Gate, unless I am mistaken. From the feeling of the air we must be in a wide 


He raised his staff, and for a brief instant there was blaze like a 

saw a vast roof far above their heads upheld by many mighty pillars hewn of 
stone. Before them and on either side stretched a huge empty hall; its black 
walls, polished and smooth as glass, flashed and glittered. Three other 
entrances they saw, dark black arches: one straight before them eastwards, 


'That is all that I shall venture on for the present,' said Gandalf. 

'There used to be great windows on the mountain-side, and shafts leading out 

now, but it is night outside again, and we cannot tell until morning. If I 
am right, tomorrow we may actually see the morning peeping in. But in the 
meanwhile we had better go no further. Let us rest, if we can. Things have 

not through yet, and it is a long way down to the Gates that open on the 


The Company spent that night in the great cavernous hall, huddled close 
together in a corner to escape the draught: there seemed to be a steady 

hung the darkness, hollow and immense, and they were oppressed by the 
loneliness and vastness of the dolven halls and endlessly branching stairs 
and passages. The wildest imaginings that dark rumour had ever suggested to 


'There must have been a mighty crowd of dwarves here at one time ' said 
Sam; 'and every one of them busier than badgers for five hundred years to 
make all this, and most in hard rock too! What did they do it all for? They 


'These are not holes,’ said Gimli. 'This is the great realm and city of 
the Dwarrowdelf. And of old it was not darksome, but full of light and 


He rose and standing in the dark he began to chant in a deep voice, 


The world was young, the mountains green, 







When Durin woke and walked alone. 


He drank from yet untasted wells; 




As gems upon a silver thread, 




In Elder Days before the fall 


The Western Seas have passed away: 



In many-pillared halls of stone 




The light of sun and star and moon 


There shone for ever fair and bright. 



There chisel clove, and graver wrote; 


There beryl, pearl, and opal pale, 


Buckler and corslet, axe and sword, 



Beneath the mountains music woke: 









The world is grey, the mountains old, 


No harp is wrung, no hammer falls: 



In Moria, in Khazad-dym. 




There lies his crown in water deep, 



'I like that! ' said Sam. V I should like to learn it. In Moria, in 

lamps. Are there piles of jewels and gold lying about here still? ' 

Gimli was silent. Having sung his song he would say no more. 


Moria; there is nothing left in the upper halls. And since the dwarves fled, 
no one dares to seek the shafts and treasuries down in the deep places: they 
are drowned in water— or in a shadow of fear.' 



’For mithrif answered Gandalf. 'The wealth of Moria was not in gold 
and jewels, the toys of the Dwarves; nor in iron, their servant. Such things 

for them: all things that they desired they could obtain in traffic. For 
here alone in the world was found Moria-silver, or true-silver as some have 
called it: mithril is the Elvish name. The Dwarves have a name which they do 
not tell. Its worth was ten times that of gold, and now it is beyond price; 

it. The lodes lead away north towards Caradhras, and down to darkness. The 
Dwarves tell no tale; but even as mithril was the foundation of their 
wealth, so also it was their destruction: they delved too greedily and too 

brought to light the Ores have gathered nearly all, and given it in tribute 


' Mithril! All folk desired it. It could be beaten like copper, and 




polished like glass; and the Dwarves could make of it a metal, light and yet 
harder than tempered steel. Its beauty was like to that of common silver, 

loved it, and among many uses they made of it ithildin , starmoon, which you 
saw upon the doors. Bilbo had a corslet of mithril-rings that Thorin gave 
him. I wonder what has become of it? Gathering dust still in Michel Delving 


'What? ' cried Gimli, startled out of his silence. 'A corslet of 


'Yes,' said Gandalf. I never told him, but its worth was greater than 


Frodo said nothing, but he put his hand under his tunic and touched the 
rings of his mail-shirt. He felt staggered to think that he had been walking 
about with the price of the Shire under his jacket. Had Bilbo known? He felt 

his thoughts had been carried away from the dark Mines, to Rivendell, to 
Bilbo, and to Bag End in the days while Bilbo was still there. He wished 
with all his heart that he was back there, and in those days, mowing the 

or mithril — or the Ring. 


guard. As if it were a breath that came in through unseen doors out of deep 
places, dread came over him. His hands were cold and his brow damp. He 
listened. All his mind was given to listening and nothing else for two slow 


His watch was nearly over, when, far off where he guessed that the 
western archway stood, he fancied that he could see two pale points of 

have nearly fallen asleep on guard,' he thought. 'I was on the edge of a 
dream.' He stood up and rubbed his eyes, and remained standing, peering into 


When he lay down he quickly went to sleep, but it seemed to him that 
the dream went on: he heard whispers, and saw the two pale points of light 
approaching, slowly. He woke and found that the others were speaking softly 

eastern archway through a shaft near the roof came a long pale gleam; and 
across the hall through the northern arch light also glimmered faint and 






Frodo sat up. 'Good morning! 'said Gandalf: 'For morning it is again 
at last. I was right, you see. We are high up on the east side of Moria. 

Mirrormere lying in the Dimrill Dale before us.' 

'I shall be glad,' said Gimli. 'I have looked on Moria, and it is very 

kindred. I doubt now that Balin ever came here.' 

After they had breakfasted Gandalf decided to go on again at once. 'We 

that none of us will wish to spend another night in Moria.’ 

'No indeed! ’ said Boromir. 'Which way shall we take? Yonder eastward 


’Maybe,’ said Gandalf. 'But I du not know yet exactly where we are. 

Great Gates; and it may not be easy to find the right road down to them. The 
eastern arch will probably prove to be the way that we must take; but before 
we make up our minds we ought to look about us. Let us go towards that light 

the light comes only down deep shafts.’ 

Following his lead the Company passed under the northern arch. They 

stronger, and they saw that it came through a doorway on their right. It was 
high and flat-topped, and the stone door was still upon its hinges, standing 
half open. Beyond it was a large square chamber. It was dimly lit, but to 

and they blinked as they entered. 


things lying in the doorway whose shapes they could not at first make out. 
The chamber was lit by a wide shaft high in the further eastern wall; it 
slanted upwards and, far above, a small square patch of blue sky could be 

room: a single oblong block, about two feet high, upon which was laid a 


'It looks like a tomb,’ muttered Frodo, and bent forwards with a 
curious sense of foreboding, to look more closely at it. Gandalf came 





These are Daeron's Runes, such as were used of old in Moria,' said 
Gandalf. 'Here is written in the tongues of Men and Dwarves: 



'He is dead then,' said Frodo. T feared it was so.' Gimli cast his 










thought of Bilbo and his long friendship with the dwarf, and of Balin's 
visit to the Shire long ago. In that dusty chamber in the mountains it 


At length they stirred and looked up, and began to search for anything 
that would give them tidings of Balin's fate, or show what had become of his 
folk. There was another smaller door on the other side of the chamber, under 

and among them were broken swords and axe-heads, and cloven shields and 
helms. Some of the swords were crooked: ore-scimitars with blackened blades. 

There were many recesses cut in the rock of the walls, and in them were 

beside the shattered lid of one there lay the remains of a book. It had been 
slashed and stabbed and partly burned, and it was so stained with black and 
other dark marks like old blood that little of it could be read. Gandalf 

slab. He pored over it for some time without speaking. Frodo and Gimli 
standing at his side could see, as he gingerly turned the leaves, that they 
were written by many different hands, in runes, both of Moria and of Dale, 


At last Gandalf looked up. 'It seems to be a record of the fortunes of 
Balin's folk,' he said. V I guess that it began with their coming to Dimrill 

the years after their arrival. The top page is marked one — three, so at 
least two are missing from the beginning. Listen to this! 


word is blurred and burned; probably room — we slew many in the bright — I 
think — sun in the dale. Flui was killed by an arrow. He slew the great. 

Then there is a blur followed by Flui under grass near Mirror mere. The next 
line or two I cannot read. Then comes We have taken the twentyfirst hall of 


Then Balin has set up his seat in the Chamber of Mazarbul.' 

'The Chamber of Records,' said Gimli. V I guess that is where we now 







word gold , and Darin 's Axe and something helm. Then Balin is now lord of 
Morici. That seems to end a chapter. After some stars another hand begins, 
and I can see we found truesilver, and later the word wellforged and then 

upper armouries of Third Deep, something go westwards, a blur, to Hollin 


Gandalf paused and set a few leaves aside. 'There are several pages of 
the same sort, rather hastily written and much damaged, he said; 'but I can 
make little of them in this light. Now there must be a number of leaves 

colony, I suppose. Let me see! No, they are too cut and stained; I cannot 
read them. We might do better in the sunlight. Wait! Here is something: a 


’That would be Ori's hand,' said Gimli, looking over the wizard's arm. 

'He could write well and speedily, and often used the Elvish characters.’ 



'The first clear word is sorrow, but the rest of the line is lost, unless it 
ends in estre. Yes, it must be yestre followed by day being the tenth of 
novembre Balin lord of Moria fell in Dimrill Dale. He went alone to look in 

more ...up from east up the Silverlode. The remainder of the page is so 
blurred that I can hardly make anything out, but I think I can read we have 
barred the gates, and then can hold them long if, and then perhaps horrible 

less than five years. I wonder what happened afterwards; but there is no 
time to puzzle out the last few pages. Here is the last page of all.' He 


'It is grim reading,' he said. 'I fear their end was cruel. Listen! We 
cannot get out. We cannot get out. They have taken the Bridge and second 

so that I can only read went 5 days ago. The last lines run the pool is up 
to the wall at Westgate. The Watcher in the Water took Uin. We cannot get 
out. The end comes, and then drums, drums in the deep. I wonder what that 

are coming. There is nothing more.' Gandalf paused and stood in silent 






A sudden dread and a horror of the chamber fell on the Company. ' We 
cannot get out,' muttered Gimli. 'It was well for us that the pool had sunk 


Gandalf raised his head and looked round. 'They seem to have made a 
last stand by both doors,' he said; 'but there were not many left by that 
time. So ended the attempt to retake Moria! It was valiant but foolish. The 

Fundin. Here he must lie in the halls of his fathers. We will take this 
book, the Book of Mazarbul, and look at it more closely later. You had 
better keep it, Gimli, and take it back to Dbin, if you get a chance. It 

morning is passing.' 



'Back to the hall,' answered Gandalf. 'But our visit to this room has 

Chamber of Mazarbul; and the hall must be the twenty-first of the North-end. 
Therefore we should leave by the eastern arch of the hall, and bear right 
and south, and go downwards. The Twenty-first Hall should be on the Seventh 
Level, that is six above the level of the Gates. Come now! Back to the hall! 




rolling Boom that seemed to come from depths far below, and to tremble in 
the stone at their feet. They sprang towards the door in alarm. Doom, doom 
it rolled again, as if huge hands were turning the very caverns of Moria 

in the hall, and answering horns and harsh cries were heard further off. 

There was a hurrying sound of many feet. 





'Trapped! ' cried Gandalf. 'Why did I delay? Here we are, caught, just 
as they were before. But I was not here then. We will see what — ' 



'Slam the doors and wedge them! ' shouted Aragorn. 'And keep your packs 
on as long as you can: we may get a chance to cut our way out yet.' 



We will go that way, if we get a chance.' 




Another harsh horn-call and shrill cries rang out. Feet were coming 

swords. Glamdring shone with a pale light, and Sting glinted at the edges. 
Boromir set his shoulder against the western door. 


to Boromir's side and drew himself up to his full height. 

'Who comes hither to disturb the rest of Balin Lord of Moria? ' he 


There was a rush of hoarse laughter, like the fall of sliding stones 



doom went the drums in the deep. 


door and thrust forward his staff: There was a dazzling flash that lit the 
chamber and the passage outside. For an instant the wizard looked out. 
Arrows whined and whistled down the corridor as he sprang back. 


evil: black Uruks of Mordor. For the moment they are hanging back, but there 
is something else there. A great cave-troll, I think, or more than one. 



'And no hope at all, if they come at the other door as well,' said 


'There is no sound outside here yet,' said Aragorn, who was standing by 

a stair: it plainly does not lead back towards the hall. But it is no good 
flying blindly this way with the pursuit just behind. We cannot block the 
door. Its key is gone and the lock is broken, and it opens inwards. We must 
do something to delay the enemy first. We will make them fear the Chamber of 


Heavy feet were heard in the corridor. Boromir flung himself against 
the door and heaved it to; then he wedged it with broken sword-blades and 

But they had no chance to fly yet. There was a blow on the door that made it 
quiver; and then it began to grind slowly open, driving back the wedges. A 
huge arm and shoulder, with a dark skin of greenish scales, was thrust 

through below. There was a dead silence outside. 




Boromir leaped forward and hewed at the arm with all his might; but his 

notched. 


his heart. 'The Shire! ' he cried, and springing beside Boromir, he stooped, 
and stabbed with Sting at the hideous foot. There was a bellow, and the foot 
jerked back, nearly wrenching Sting from Frodo's arm. Black drops dripped 

door and slammed it again. 


have a good blade, Frodo son of Drogo ! ' 


hammers were beating against it. It cracked and staggered back, and the 
opening grew suddenly wide. Arrows came whistling in, but struck the 
northern wall, and fell harmlessly to the floor. There was a horn-blast and 


How many there were the Company could not count. The affray was sharp, 
but the ores were dismayed by the fierceness of the defence. Legolas shot 
two through the throat. Gimli hewed the legs from under another that had 



fallen the rest fled shrieking, leaving the defenders unharmed, except for 
Sam who had a scratch along the scalp. A quick duck had saved him; and he 
had felled his ore: a sturdy thrust with his Barrow-blade. A fire was 

backwards, if he had seen it. 




But even as they retreated, and before Pippin and Merry had reached the 
stair outside, a huge ore-chieftain, almost man-high, clad in black mail 
from head to foot, leaped into the chamber; behind him his followers 

coals, and his tongue was red; he wielded a great spear. With a thrust of 
his huge hide shield he turned Boromir's sword and bore him backwards, 
throwing him to the ground. Diving under Aragorn's blow with the speed of a 

straight at Frodo. The blow caught him on the right side, and Frodo was 




hurled against the wall and pinned. Sam, with a cry, hacked at the 
spear- shaft, and it broke. But even as the ore flung down the truncheon and 

like flame and the helm burst asunder. The ore fell with cloven head. His 
followers fled howling, as Boromir and Aragorn sprang at them. 




'Now! ' shouted Gandalf. 'Now is the last chance. Run for it! ' 

Aragorn picked up Frodo where he lay by the wall and made for the 
stair, pushing Merry and Pippin in front of him. The others followed; but 

by Balin's tomb with his head bowed. Boromir hauled the eastern door to, 
grinding upon its hinges: it had great iron rings on either side, but could 


'I am all right,' gasped Frodo. 'I can walk. Put me down! ' 





'Not yet! ' said Gandalf. 'But there is time for wonder. Off you go, 
all of you, down the stairs! Wait a few minutes for me at the bottom, but if 
I do not come soon, go on! Go quickly and choose paths leading right and 




'Do as I say! ' said Gandalf fiercely. 'Swords are no more use here. 



The passage was lit by no shaft and was utterly dark. They groped their 
way down a long flight of steps, and then looked back; but they could see 

seemed to be still standing on guard by the closed door. Frodo breathed 
heavily and leaned against Sam, who put his arms about him. They stood 
peering up the stairs into the darkness. Frodo thought he could hear the 

a sighing echo. He could not catch what was said. The walls seemed to be 
trembling. Every now and again the drum-beats throbbed and rolled: doom, 


Suddenly at the top of the stair there was a stab of white light. Then 








and fell to the ground in the midst of the Company. 

'Well, well! That's over! ' said the wizard struggling to his feet. 'I 

destroyed. But don't stand here! Go on! You will have to do without light 
for a while: I am rather shaken. Go on! Go on! Where are you, Gimli? Come 


They stumbled after him wondering what had happened. Doom, doom 


the drum-beats again: they now sounded muffled and far away, but they were 
following. There was no other sound of pursuit, neither tramp of feet, nor 

be going in the direction that he desired. Every now and again it descended 
a flight of steps, fifty or more, to a lower level. At the moment that was 
their chief danger; for in the dark they could not see a descent, until they 

with his staff like a blind man. 


had descended many flights of stairs. There was still no sound of pursuit. 
Almost they began to hope that they would escape. At the bottom of the 


'It is getting hot! ' he gasped. 'We ought to be down at least to the 
level of the Gates now. Soon I think we should look for a left-hand turn to 

moment, even if all the ores ever spawned are after us.' 

Gimli took his arm and helped him down to a seat on the step. 'What 
happened away up there at the door? ’ he asked. 'Did you meet the beater of 



by something that I have not met before. I could think of nothing to do but 
to try and put a shutting -spell on the door. I know many; but to do things 
of that kind rightly requires time, and even then the door can be broken by 


'As I stood there I could hear ore- voices on the other side: at any 

they seemed to be talking in their own hideous language. All I caught was 




ghvsh; that is "fire". Then something came into the chamber — I felt it 
through the door, and the ores themselves were afraid and fell silent. It 


’What it was I cannot guess, but I have never felt such a challenge. 

The counter-spell was terrible. It nearly broke me. For an instant the door 
left my control and began to open ! I had to speak a word of Command. That 

cloud was blocking out all the light inside, and I was thrown backwards down 
the stairs. All the wall gave way, and the roof of the chamber as well, I 


'I am afraid Balin is buried deep, and maybe something else is buried 

blocked. Ah! I have never felt so spent, but it is passing. And now what 
about you, Frodo? There was not time to say so, but I have never been more 
delighted in my life than when you spoke. I feared that it was a brave but 


'What about me? ' said Frodo. 'I am alive, and whole I think. I am 


'Well,' said Aragorn, 'I can only say that hobbits are made of a stuff 
so tough that I have never met the like of it. Had I known, I would have 
spoken softer in the Inn at Bree! That spear -thrust would have skewered a 



feel as if I had been caught between a hammer and an anvil.’ He said no 
more. He found breathing painful. 


meets the eye, as I said of him long ago.’ Frodo wondered if the remark 


They now went on again. Before long Gimli spoke. He had keen eyes in 
the dark. 'I think,’ he said, 'that there is a light ahead. But it is not 


' Ghvsh !' muttered Gandalf. 'I wonder if that is what they meant: that 
the lower levels are on fire? Still, we can only go on.’ 


flickering and glowing on the walls away down the passage before them. They 
could now see their way: in front the road sloped down swiftly, and some way 
ahead there stood a low archway; through it the glowing light came. The air 







wait. As he stood just beyond the opening they saw his face lit by a red 
glow. Quickly he stepped back. 


doubt. But I know now where we are: we have reached the First Deep, the 
level immediately below the Gates. This is the Second Hall of Old Moria; and 
the Gates are near: away beyond the eastern end, on the left, not more than 

through the First Hall, and out! But come and look! ' 

They peered out. Before them was another cavernous hall. It was loftier 

eastern end; westward it ran away into darkness. Down the centre stalked a 
double line of towering pillars. They were carved like boles of mighty trees 
whose boughs upheld the roof with a branching tracery of stone. Their stems 

Right across the floor, close to the feet of two huge pillars a great 
fissure had opened. Out of it a fierce red light came, and now and again 
flames licked at the brink and curled about the bases of the columns. Wisps 


'If we had come by the main road down from the upper halls, we should 

between us and pursuit. Come! There is no time to lose.' 

Even as he spoke they heard again the pursuing drum-beat: Doom, doom, 
doom. Away beyond the shadows at the western end of the hall there came 



'Now for the last race! ’ said Gandalf. 'If the sun is shining outside 
we may still escape. After me! ' 


distance was greater than it had looked. As they ran they heard the beat and 
echo of many hurrying feet behind. A shrill yell went up: they had been 

head. 


them off. We are on the wrong side! ’ 






narrow.’ 


floor vanished and fell to an unknown depth. The outer door could only be 
reached by a slender bridge of stone, without kerb or rail, that spanned the 
chasm with one curving spring of fifty feet. It was an ancient defence of 

outer passages. They could only pass across it in single file. At the brink 
Gandalf halted and the others came up in a pack behind. 


and up the stair beyond the door! ' 


pierced Gandalf s hat and stuck there like a black feather. Frodo looked 
behind. Beyond the fire he saw swarming black figures: there seemed to be 
hundreds of ores. They brandished spears and scimitars which shone red as 

louder, doom, doom. 


shot for his small bow. He drew, but his hand fell, and the arrow slipped to 
the ground. He gave a cry of dismay and fear. Two great trolls appeared; 
they bore great slabs of stone, and flung them down to serve as gangways 

terror. The ranks of the ores had opened, and they crowded away, as if they 
themselves were afraid. Something was coming up behind them. What it was 
could not be seen: it was like a great shadow, in the middle of which was a 

be in it and to go before it. 


bent over it. Then with a rush it leaped across the fissure. The flames 
roared up to greet it, and wreathed about it; and a black smoke swirled in 
the air. Its streaming mane kindled, and blazed behind it. In its right hand 

many thongs. 



Gimli stared with wide eyes. 'Durin's Bane! ' he cried, and letting his 


'A Balrog,' muttered Gandalf. 'Now I understand.' He faltered and 
leaned heavily on his staff. 'What an evil fortune! And I am already weary.' 





and poured over the stone gangways. Then Boromir raised his horn and blew. 
Loud the challenge rang and bellowed, like the shout of many throats under 
the cavernous roof. For a moment the ores quailed and the fiery shadow 

wind, and the enemy advanced again. 

'Over the bridge!' cried Gandalf, recalling his strength. "Fly ! This is 

Boromir did not heed the command, but still held their ground, side by side, 
behind Gandalf at the far end of the bridge. The others halted just within 
the doorway at the hall's end, and turned, unable to leave their leader to 


The Balrog reached the bridge. Gandalf stood in the middle of the span, 

gleamed, cold and white. His enemy halted again, facing him, and the shadow 
about it reached out like two vast wings. It raised the whip, and the thongs 
whined and cracked. Fire came from its nostrils. But Gandalf stood firm. 


fell. V I am a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the flame of Anor. You 
cannot pass. The dark fire will not avail you, flame of Udyn. Go back to the 


The Balrog made no answer. The fire in it seemed to die, but the 
darkness grew. It stepped forward slowly on to the bridge, and suddenly it 

wall; but still Gandalf could be seen, glimmering in the gloom; he seemed 
small, and altogether alone: grey and bent, like a wizened tree before the 


From out of the shadow a red sword leaped flaming. 



There was a ringing clash and a stab of white fire. The Balrog fell 

bridge, stepped back a pace, and then again stood still. 



With a bound the Balrog leaped full upon the bridge. Its whip whirled 


'He cannot stand alone! ' cried Aragorn suddenly and ran back along the 





'Gondor! ' cried Boromir and leaped after him. 

At that moment Gandalf lifted his staff, and crying aloud he smote the 

blinding sheet of white flame sprang up. The bridge cracked. Right at the 
Balrog's feet it broke, and the stone upon which it stood crashed into the 
gulf, while the rest remained, poised, quivering like a tongue of rock 


With a terrible cry the Balrog fell forward, and its shadow plunged 

lashed and curled about the wizard’s knees, dragging him to the brink. He 
staggered and fell, grasped vainly at the stone, and slid into the abyss. 



The fires went out, and blank darkness fell. The Company stood rooted 
with horror staring into the pit. Even as Aragorn and Boromir came flying 
back, the rest of the bridge cracked and fell. With a cry Aragorn roused 



command. Follow me! ' 


leading, Boromir at the rear. At the top was a wide echoing passage. Along 
this they fled. Frodo heard Sam at his side weeping, and then he found that 

behind, mournful now and slow; doom! 

They ran on. The light grew before them; great shafts pierced the roof. 


high windows in the east. They fled across it. Through its huge broken doors 
they passed, and suddenly before them the Great Gates opened, an arch of 


There was a guard of ores crouching in the shadows behind the great 

down. Aragorn smote to the ground the captain that stood in his path, and 
the rest fled in terror of his wrath. The Company swept past them and took 
no heed of them. Out of the Gates they ran and sprang down the huge and 


Thus, at last, they came beyond hope under the sky and felt the wind on 


They did not halt until they were out of bowshot from the walls. 





but eastwards there was a golden light on the land. It was but one hour 
after noon. The sun was shining; the clouds were white and high. 

They looked back. Dark yawned the archway of the Gates under the 

doom. A thin black smoke trailed out. Nothing else was to be seen; the dale 
all around was empty. Doom. Grief at last wholly overcame them, and they 
wept long: some standing and silent, some cast upon the ground. Doom, doom. 









'Alas! I Fear we cannot stay here longer,' said Aragorn. He looked 
towards the mountains and held up his sword. 'Farewell, Gandalf ! ' he cried. 

spoke true! What hope have we without you? ' 

He turned to the Company. 'We must do without hope,' he said. 'At least 



a long road, and much to do.' 


of shadows between two great arms of the mountains, above which three white 
peaks were shining: Celebdil, Fanuidhol, Caradhras. the Mountains of Moria. 
At the head of the glen a torrent flowed like a white lace over an endless 

mountains' feet. 



'Down the deep-cloven way that climbs beside the torrent we should have 


'Or Caradhras less cruel,' said Gimli. 'There he stands smiling in the 
sun! ' He shook his fist at the furthest of the snow-capped peaks and turned 


To the east the outflung arm of the mountains marched to a sudden end, 

the Misty Mountains receded endlessly as far as sight could reach. Less than 
a mile away, and a little below them, for they still stood high up on the 
west side of the dale, there lay a mere. It was long and oval, shaped like a 

was beyond the shadows under the sunlit sky. Yet its waters were dark: a 
deep blue like clear evening sky seen from a lamp-lit room. Its face was 
still and unruffled. About it lay a smooth sward, shelving down on all sides 


'There lies the Mirrormere, deep Kheled-zvram! ' said Gimli sadly. 'I 
remember that he said: "May you have joy of the sight! But we cannot linger 





hasten away, and he that must remain.' 


broken, fading to a winding track between heather and whin that thrust amid 
the cracking stones. But still it could be seen that once long ago a great 
paved way had wound upwards from the lowlands of the Dwarf-kingdom. 




topped with slender birches, or fir-trees sighing in the wind. An eastward 
bend led them hard by the sward of Mirrormere, and there not far from the 


'That is Durin's Stone! ' cried Gimli. 'I cannot pass without turning 
aside for a moment to look at the wonder of the dale ! ' 


Sun sinks early. The Ores will not, maybe, come out till after dusk, but we 
must be far away before nightfall. The Moon is almost spent, and it will be 


'Come with me, Frodo! ' cried the dwarf, springing from the road. 'I 
would not have you go without seeing Kheled-zvram.' He ran down the long 

of hurt and weariness; Sam came up behind. 

Beside the standing stone Gimli halted and looked up. It was cracked 

pillar marks the spot where Durin first looked in the Mirrormere,' said the 
dwarf. 'Let us look ourselves once, ere we go!' 


slowly they saw the forms of the encircling mountains mirrored in a profound 
blue, and the peaks were like plumes of white flame above them; beyond there 
was a space of sky. There like jewels sunk in the deep shone glinting stars, 

could be seen. 


of Durin till he wakes. Farewell! ' He bowed, and turned away, and hastened 
back up the green-sward to the road again. 




The road now turned south and went quickly downwards, running out from 
between the arms of the dale. Some way below the mere they came on a deep 




well of water, clear as crystal, from which a freshet fell over a stone lip 


'Here is the spring from which the Silverlode rises.' said Gimli. 'Do 


'Soon it becomes a swift river, and it gathers water from many other 
mountain- streams,' said Aragorn. 'Our road leads beside it for many miles. 
For I shall take you by the road that Gandalf chose, and first I hope to 

yonder.' They looked as he pointed, and before them they could see the 
stream leaping down to the trough of the valley, and then running on and 


'There lie the woods of Lothlurien! ’ said Legolas. 'That is the 
fairest of all the dwellings of my people. There are no trees like the trees 
of that land. For in the autumn their leaves fall not, but turn to gold. Not 

boughs are laden with yellow flowers; and the floor of the wood is golden, 
and golden is the roof, and its pillars are of silver, for the bark of the 
trees is smooth and grey. So still our songs in Mirkwood say. My heart would 



many miles away. Let us hasten! ' 


Aragorn was leading them at a great pace, and after a while they lagged 
behind. They had eaten nothing since the early morning. Sam's cut was 

wind seemed chill after the warm darkness of Moria. He shivered. Frodo felt 
every step more painful and he gasped for breath. 


Aragorn. The others halted, and Aragorn ran back, calling to Boromir to come 


'I am sorry, Frodo! ' he cried, full of concern. 'So much has happened 
this day and we have such need of haste, that I have forgotten that you were 
hurt; and Sam too. You should have spoken. We have done nothing to ease 



further on there is a place where we can rest for a little. There I will do 
what I can for you. Come, Boromir! We will carry them.' 




Soon afterwards they came upon another stream that ran down from the 

they plunged over a fall of green-hued stone, and foamed down into a dell. 
About it stood fir-trees, short and bent, and its sides were steep and 
clothed with harts-tongue and shrubs of whortle -berry. At the bottom there 

pebbles. Here they rested. It was now nearly three hours after noon, and 
they had come only a few miles from the Gates. Already the sun was 


While Gimli and the two younger hobbits kindled a fire of brush- and 



deep, but it looked ugly, and Aragorn’s face was grave as he examined it. 


’Good luck, Sam! ’ he said. 'Many have received worse than this in 
payment for the slaying of their first ore. The cut is not poisoned, as the 
wounds of ore-blades too often are. It should heal well when I have tended 


He opened his pouch and drew out some withered leaves. 'They are dry 
and some of their virtue has one, he said, but here I have still some of the 

and wash the wound clean, and I will bind it. Now it is your turn. Frodo! ' 

'I am all right,' said Frodo, reluctant to have his garments touched. 



'No! ' said Aragorn. 'We must have a look and see what the hammer and 
the anvil have done to you. I still marvel that you are alive at all.’ 

Gently he stripped off Frodo's old jacket and worn tunic, and gave a gasp of 

the light upon a rippling sea. Carefully he took it off and held it up, and 
the gems on it glittered like stars, and the sound of the shaken rings was 


'Look, my friends!’ he called. 'Here's a pretty hobbit-skin to wrap an 
el ven -princeling in! If it were known that hobbits had such hides, all the 


'And all the arrows of all the hunters in the world would be in vain,' 
said Gimli, gazing at the mail in wonder. 'It is a mithril-coat. Mithril! I 
have never seen or heard tell of one so fair. Is this the coat that Gandalf 






'I have often wondered what you and Bilbo were doing, so close in his 
little room,' said Merry. 'Bless the old hobbit! I love him more than ever. 



There was a dark and blackened bruise on Frodo's right side and breast. 
Under the mail there was a shirt of soft leather, but at one point the rings 
had been driven through it into the flesh. Frodo's left side also was scored 

the food ready. Aragorn bathed the hurts with water in which athelas was 
steeped. The pungent fragrance filled the dell, and all those who stooped 
over the steaming water felt refreshed and strengthened. Soon Frodo felt the 

the touch for many days. Aragorn bound some soft pads of cloth at his side. 

'The mail is marvellously light,' he said. 'Put it on again, if you can 
bear it. My heart is glad to know that you have such a coat. Do not lay it 

while; and that will seldom chance while your quest lasts.’ 

When they had eaten, the Company got ready to go on. They put out the 
fire and hid all traces of it. Then climbing out of the dell they took to 

westward heights and great shadows crept down the mountain-sides. Dusk 
veiled their feet, and mist rose in the hollows. Away in the east the 

Frodo now feeling eased and greatly refreshed were able to go at a fair 
pace, and with only one brief halt Aragorn led the Company on for nearly 


It was dark. Deep night had fallen. There were many clear stars, hut 
the fast- waning moon would not be seen till late. Gimli and Frodo were at 

road behind. At length Gimli broke the silence. 

'Not a sound but the wind,' he said. 'There are no goblins near, or my 

driving us from Moria. And maybe that was all their purpose, and they had 
nothing else to do with us-with the Ring. Though Ores will often pursue foes 
for many leagues into the plain, if they have a fallen captain to avenge.’ 


he had heard something, or thought he had. As soon as the shadows had fallen 




about them and the road behind was dim, he had heard again the quick patter 
of feet. Even now he heard it. He turned swiftly. There were two tiny gleams 

slipped aside and vanished. 



'I don't know.' answered Frodo. 'I thought I heard feet, and I thought 
I saw a light-like eyes. I have thought so often, since we first entered 



night-speech of plant and stone,' he said. 'Come! Let us hurry! The others 


The night-wind blew chill up the valley to meet them. Before them a 
wide grey shadow loomed, and they heard an endless rustle of leaves like 


'Lothlurien! ' cried Legolas. 'Lothlurien! We have come to the eaves of 


Under the night the trees stood tall before them, arched over the road 
and stream that ran suddenly beneath their spreading boughs. In the dim 

of fallow gold. 


trees! We are still little more than five leagues from the Gates, but we can 
go no further. Here let us hope that the virtue of the Elves will keep us 


'If Elves indeed still dwell here in the darkening world,' said Gimli. 

'It is long since any of my own folk journeyed hither back to the land 

is not yet deserted, for there is a secret power here that holds evil from 
the land. Nevertheless its folk are seldom seen, and maybe they dwell now 
deep in the woods and far from the northern border.' 


some memory stirred in him. 'We must fend for ourselves tonight. We will go 
forward a short way, until the trees are all about us, and then we will turn 


He stepped forward; but Boromir stood irresolute and did not follow. 



'What other fairer way would you desire? ’ said Aragorn. 




'A plain road, though it led through a hedge of swords,' said Boromir. 


Against my will we passed under the shades of Moria, to our loss. And now we 
must enter the Golden Wood, you say. But of that perilous land we have heard 
in Gondor, and it is said that few come out who once go in; and of that few 


'Say not unscathed, but if you say unchanged, then maybe you will speak 
the truth said Aragorn. But lore wanes in Gondor, Boromir, if in the city of 

will, there is no other way for us — unless you would go back to 
Moria-gate, or scale the pathless mountains, or swim the Great River all 


'Then lead on! ' said Boromir. 'But it is perilous.’ 


fear it, or those who bring some evil with them. Follow me! ' 

They had gone little more than a mile into the forest when they came 

climbed back westward towards the mountains. They heard it splashing over a 
fall away among the shadows on their right. Its dark hurrying waters ran 
across the path before them, and joined the Silverlode in a swirl of dim 


'Here is Nimrodel! ' said Legolas. 'Of this stream the Silvan Elves 

the rainbow on its falls, and the golden flowers that floated in its foam. 

All is dark now and the Bridge of Nimrodel is broken down. I will bathe my 
feet, for it is said that the water is healing to the weary.' He went 


'Follow me!’ he cried. 'The water is not deep. Let us wade across! On 
the further bank we can rest, and the sound of the falling water may bring 


One by one they climbed down and followed Legolas. For a moment Frodo 
stood near the brink and let the water flow over his tired feet. It was cold 
but its touch was clean, and as he went on and it mounted to his knees, he 


When all the Company had crossed, they sat and rested and ate a little 
food; and Legolas told them tales of Lothlurien that the Elves of Mirkwood 
still kept in their hearts, of sunlight and starlight upon the meadows by 






At length a silence fell, and they heard the music of the waterfall 

voice singing, mingled with the sound of the water. 

'Do you hear the voice of Nimrodel? ' asked Legolas. 'I will sing you a 

which she lived lung ago. It is a fair song in our woodland tongue; but this 
is how it runs in the Westron Speech, as some in Rivendell now sing it.' In 
a soft voice hardly to be heard amid the rustle of the leaves above them he 






Her mantle white was hemmed with gold, 



A star was bound upon her brows, 





Her hair was long, her limbs were white, 




As leaf of linden-tree. 





Her voice as falling silver fell 






For lost of yore was Nimrodel 



Beneath the mountain-lee 







A wind by night in Northern lands 



Across the streaming tide. 



Beyond the heaving waves that tossed 



Now low beyond the swell, 











From helm to sea they saw him leap, 





As mew upon the wing. 





Afar they saw him strong and fair 




No tidings Elven-folk have heard 





The voice of Legolas faltered, and the song ceased. 'I cannot sing any 
more,' he said. 'That is but a part, for I have forgotten much. It is long 

Blossom, when the Dwarves awakened evil in the mountains.' 



'I said not so; yet evil came,' answered Legolas sadly. 'Then many of 
the Elves of Nimrodel's kindred left their dwellings and departed and she 
was lost far in the South, in the passes of the White Mountains; and she 

spring when the wind is in the new leaves the echo of her voice may still be 
heard by the falls that bear her name. And when the wind is in the South the 
voice of Amroth comes up from the sea; for Nimrodel flows into Silverlode, 

flows into the Bay of B elf alas whence the Elves of Lurien set sail. But 
neither Nimrodel nor Amroth ever came back. 


grew near the falls; for that was the custom of the Elves of Lurien, to 
dwell in the trees, and maybe it is so still. Therefore they were called the 
Galadhrim, the Tree -people. Deep in their forest the trees are very great. 


strong places of stone before the Shadow came.' 

'And even in these latter days dwelling in the trees might be thought 

to the road that led back to Dimrill Dale, and then up into the roof of dark 


'Your words bring good counsel, Gimli,' said Aragorn. 'We cannot build 
a house, but tonight we will do as the Galadhrim and seek refuge in the 

was wise.’ 


the deeper woods, westward along the mountain-stream away from 


Not far from the falls of Nimrodel they found a cluster of trees, some of 
which overhung the stream. Their great grey trunks were of mighty girth, but 


'I will climb up,’ said Legolas. 'I am at home among trees, by root or 
bough, though these trees are of a kind strange to me, save as a name in 





but I have never climbed in one. I will see now what is their shape and way 


'Whatever it may be,' said Pippin, 'they will be marvellous trees 
indeed if they can offer any rest at night, except to birds. I cannot sleep 


'Then dig a hole in the ground,' said Legolas, 'if that is more after 

hide from Ores.’ He sprang lightly up from the ground and caught a branch 
that grew from the trunk high above his head. But even as he swung there for 
a moment, a voice spoke suddenly from the tree-shadows above him. 


in surprise and fear. He shrank against the bole of the tree. 

'Stand still! ' he whispered to the others. 'Do not move or speak! ’ 


clear voice spoke in an elven-tongue. Frodo could understand little of what 
was said, for the speech that the Silvan folk east of the mountains used 
among themselves was unlike that of the West. Legolas looked up and 






'They're Elves,' said Sam. 'Can't you hear their voices? ' 

'Yes, they are Elves,' said Legolas; 'and they say that you breathe so 
loud that they could shoot you in the dark.' Sam hastily put his hand over 

aware of us for a long while. They heard my voice across the Nimrodel, and 
knew that I was one of their Northern kindred, and therefore they did not 
hinder our crossing; and afterwards they heard my song. Now they bid me 

our journey. The others they ask to wait a little and to keep watch at the 
foot of the tree, until they have decided what is to be done.' 


silver-grey and glimmering in the dark, and though it looked slender it 
proved strong enough to bear many men. Legolas ran lightly up, and Frodo 
followed slowly; behind came Sam trying not to breathe loudly. The branches 

upward; but near the top the main stem divided into a crown of many boughs, 




and among these they found that there had been built a wooden platform, or 
flet as such things were called in those days: the Elves called it a talan. 


passed. 


three other Elves. They were clad in shadowy-grey, and could not be seen 
among the tree-stems, unless they moved suddenly. They stood up, and one of 
them uncovered a small lamp that gave out a slender silver beam. He held it 

and spoke words of welcome in his elven-tongue. Frodo spoke haltingly in 


'Welcome!' the Elf then said again in the Common Fanguage, speaking 
slowly. 'We seldom use any tongue but our own; for we dwell now in the heart 

our own kindred in the North are sundered from us. But there are some of us 
still who go abroad for the gathering of news and the watching of our 
enemies, and they speak the languages of other lands. I am one. Haldir is my 


'But we have heard rumours of your coming, for the messengers of Elrond 
passed by Furien on their way home up the Dimrill Stair. We had not heard of 
hobbits, or halflings, for many a long year, and did not know that any yet 

of our kindred, we are willing to befriend you, as Elrond asked; though it 
is not our custom to lead strangers through our land. But you must stay here 


'Eight,' said Legolas. 'Myself, four hobbits; and two men, one of whom, 
Aragorn, is an Elf-friend of the folk of Westernesse.' 


'and he has the favour of the Lady. All then is well. But you have yet 


'The eighth is a dwarf,' said Legolas. 


with the Dwarves since the Dark Days. They are not permitted in our land. I 


'But he is from the Lonely Mountain, one of Dbin's trusty people, and 
friendly to Elrond,' said Frodo. 'Elrond himself chose him to be one of our 





The Elves spoke together in soft voices, and questioned Legolas in 
their own tongue. 'Very good,' said Haldir at last. 'We will do this, though 
it is against our liking. If Aragorn and Legolas will guard him, and answer 


'But now we must debate no longer. Your folk must not remain on the 
ground. We have been keeping watch on the rivers, ever since we saw a great 
troop of Ores going north toward Moria, along the skirts of the mountains, 

come from Moria, the peril cannot be far behind. Tomorrow early you must go 


'The four hobbits shall climb up here and stay with us- we do not fear 
them! There is another ta Ian in the next tree. There the others must take 

amiss! And have an eye on that dwarf!' 

Legolas at once went down the ladder to take Haldir's message; and soon 

of breath and seemed rather scared. 


as our own. Strider has hidden all the rest of the baggage in a deep drift 


'You had no need of your burdens,' said Haldir. 'It is cold in the 
tree-tops in winter, though the wind tonight is in the South; but we have 
food and drink to give you that will drive away the night-chill, and we have 


The hobbits accepted this second (and far better) supper very gladly. 


Elves, but in their own blankets as well, and tried to go to sleep. But 
weary as they were only Sam found that easy to do. Hobbits do not like 
heights, and do not sleep upstairs, even when they have any stairs. The flet 

rail; only on one side was there a light plaited screen, which could be 
moved and fixed in different places according to the wind. 


this bed-loft, that I shan't roll off,' he said. 

'Once I do get to sleep,’ said Sam, ’i shall go on sleeping, whether I 







through the pale roof of quivering leaves. Sam was snoring at his side long 
before he himself closed his eyes. He could dimly see the grey forms of two 

whispers. The other had gone down to take up his watch on one of the lower 
branches. At last lulled by the wind in the boughs above, and the sweet 
murmur of the falls of Nimrodel below, Frodo fell asleep with the song of 


Late in the night he awoke. The other hobbits were asleep. The Elves 




the ground below. There was a ring of metal. The sounds died slowly away, 
and seemed to go southward, on into the wood. 


alarm and saw that it was a grey-hooded Elf. He looked towards the hobbits. 



' Yrch !' said the Elf in a hissing whisper, and cast on to the flet the 


'Ores! ' said Frodo. 'What are they doing? ' But the Elf had gone. 

There were no more sounds. Even the leaves were silent, and the very 

thankful that they had not been caught on the ground; but he felt that the 
trees offered little protection, except concealment. Ores were as keen as 
hounds on a scent, it was said, but they could also climb. He drew out 

again and grew dull. In spite of the fading of his sword the feeling of 
immediate danger did not leave Frodo, rather it grew stronger. He got up and 
crawled to the opening and peered down. He was almost certain that he could 


Not Elves; for the woodland folk were altogether noiseless in their 
movements. Then he heard faintly a sound like sniffing: and something seemed 

dark, holding his breath. 


hissing through closed teeth. Then coming up, close to the stem, Frodo saw 




two pale eyes. They stopped and gazed upward unwinking. Suddenly they 


away, and a shadowy figure slipped round the trunk of the tree and vanished. 


branches. 'There was something in this tree that I have never seen before,' 
he said. 'It was not an ore. It fled as soon as I touched the tree -stem. It 
seemed to be wary, and to have some skill in trees, or I might have thought 


I did not shoot, for I dared not arouse any cries: we cannot risk 
battle. A strong company of Ores has passed. They crossed the Nimrodel-curse 

river. They seemed to pick up some scent, and they searched the ground for a 
while near the place where you halted. The three of us could not challenge a 
hundred, so we went ahead and spoke with feigned voices, leading them on 



people. None of the Ores will ever return out of Lurien. And there will be 
many Elves hidden on the northern border before another night falls. But you 
must take the road south as soon as it is fully light.’ 


yellow leaves of the mallorn, and it seemed to the hobbits that the early 
sun of a cool summer's morning was shining. Pale-blue sky peeped among the 
moving branches. Looking through an opening on the south side of the flet 

tossing gently in the breeze. 


guided now by Haldir and his brother R®mil. 'Farewell, sweet Nimrodel! ' 
cried Legolas. Frodo looked back and caught a gleam of white foam among 


grey tree-stems. 'Farewell,' he said. It seemed to him that he would never 

notes in an endless changeful music. 

They went back to the path that still went on along the west side of 

prints of ore-feet in the earth. But soon Haldir turned aside into the trees 
and halted on the bank of the river under their shadows. 






you may not see him.' He gave a call like the low whistle of a bird, and out 
of a thicket of young trees an Elf stepped, clad in grey, but with his hood 
thrown back; his hair glinted like gold in the morning sun. Haldir skilfully 
cast over the stream a coil of grey rope, and he caught it and bound the end 


'Celebrant is already a strong stream here, as you see,' said Haldir 

so far north, unless we must. But in these days of watchfulness we do not 
make bridges. This is how we cross! Follow me!' He made his end of the rope 
fast about another tree, and then ran lightly along it, over the river and 


V I can walk this path,' said Legolas; 'but the others have not this 


'No!' said Haldir. 'We have two more ropes. We will fasten them above 

strangers should be able to cross with care.' 

When this slender bridge had been made, the Company passed over, some 

best for he was sure-footed, and he walked over quickly, holding only with 
one hand; but he kept his eyes on the bank ahead and did not look down. Sam 
shuffled along, clutching hard, and looking down into the pale eddying water 


He breathed with relief when he was safely across. 'Live and learn! as 
my gaffer used to say. Though he was thinking of gardening, not of roosting 

ever did a trick like that! ’ 


Silverlode, the Elves untied the ropes and coiled two of them. R®mil, who 
had remained on the other side, drew back the last one, slung it on his 
shoulder, and with a wave of his hand went away, back to Nimrodel to keep 



the Gore, as you would say, for it is the land that lies like a spear -head 
between the arms of Silverlode and Anduin the Great. We allow no strangers 
to spy out the secrets of the Naith. Few indeed are permitted even to set 


'As was agreed, I shall here blindfold the eyes of Gimli the Dwarf. The 





in Egladil, in the Angle between the waters.' 

This was not at all to the liking of Gimli. 'The agreement was made 

prisoner. And I am no spy. My folk have never had dealings with any of the 
servants of the Enemy. Neither have we done harm to the Elves. I am no more 
likely to betray you than Legolas, or any other of my companions.’ 


master of the law, and cannot set it aside. I have done much in letting you 


Gimli was obstinate. He planted his feet firmly apart, and laid his 
hand upon the haft of his axe. 'I will go forward free,' he said, 'or I will 
go back and seek my own land, where I am known to be true of word, though I 


'You cannot go back,' said Haldir sternly. 'Now you have come thus far, 

hold you or to give you leave, as they will. You cannot cross the rivers 
again, and behind you there are now secret sentinels that you cannot pass. 



Gimli drew his axe from his belt. Haldir and his companion bent their 
bows. 'A plague on Dwarves and their stiff necks! ' said Legolas. 

'Come!' said Aragorn. 'If I am still to lead this Company, you must do 

blindfold, even Legolas. That will be best, though it will make the journey 


Gimli laughed suddenly. 'A merry troop of fools we shall look! Will 
Haldir lead us all on a string, like many blind beggars with one dog? But I 


'I am an Elf and a kinsman here,’ said Legolas, becoming angry in his 


'Now let us cry: "a plague on the stiff necks of Elves!"' said Aragorn. 

'But the Company shall all fare alike. Come, bind our eyes Haldir! ' 


not lead us well,’ said Gimli as they bound a cloth about his eyes. 

'You will have no claim,' said Haldir. 'I shall lead you well, and the 


'Alas for the folly of these days! ’ said Legolas. 'Here all are 




enemies of the one Enemy, and yet I must walk blind, while the sun is merry 


'Folly it may seem,' said Haldir. ’Indeed in nothing is the power of 

those who still oppose him. Yet so little faith and trust do we find now in 
the world beyond Lothlurien, unless maybe in Rivendell, that we dare not by 
our own trust endanger our land. We live now upon an island amid many 


'The rivers long defended us, but they are a sure guard no more for the 
Shadow has crept northward all about us. Some speak of departing, yet for 
that it already seems too late. The mountains to the west are growing evil; 
to the east the lands are waste, and full of Sauron’s creatures; and it is 

mouths of the Great River are watched by the Enemy. Even if we could come 


the shores of the Sea, we should find no longer any shelter there. It is 
said that there are still havens of. the High Elves, but they are far north 

the Lord and Lady may know, I do not.’ 



'There are Elf-havens west of my land, the Shire where Hobbits live.’ 

'Happy folk are Hobbits to dwell near the shores of the sea! ’ said 
Haldir. ’It is long indeed since any of my folk have looked on it, yet still 


'I cannot,’ said Merry. 'I have never seen them. I have never been out 
of my own land before. And if I had known what the world outside was like. I 


'Not even to see fair Lothlurien? ’ said Haldir. ’The world is indeed 
full of peril, and in it there are many dark places; but still there is much 
that is fair, and though in all lands love is now mingled with grief, it 


'Some there are among us who sing that the Shadow will draw back and 

ever again be as it was of old, or the light of the Sun as it was aforetime. 

For the Elves, I fear, it will prove at best a truce, in which they may pass 
to the Sea unhindered and leave the Middle-earth for ever. Alas for 
Lothlurien that I love! It would be a poor life in a land where no mallorn 







As they spoke thus, the Company filed slowly along the paths in the 
wood, led by Haldir, while the other Elf walked behind. They felt the ground 
beneath their feet smooth and soft, and after a while they walked more 

his hearing and other senses sharpened. He could smell the trees and the 
trodden grass. He could hear many different notes in the rustle of the 
leaves overhead, the river murmuring away on his right, and the thin clear 

they passed through an open glade. 


feeling had come upon him, and it deepened as he walked on into the Naith: 
it seemed to him that he had stepped over a bridge of time into a corner of 
the Elder Days, and was -now walking in a world that was no more. In 

still lived on in the waking world. Evil had been seen and heard there, 
sorrow had been known; the Elves feared and distrusted the world outside: 
wolves were howling on the wood's borders: but on the land of Lurien no 



come and heard the early night- wind whispering among many leaves. Then 


rested and slept without fear upon the ground; for their guides would not 
permit them to unbind their eyes, and they could not climb. In the morning 

was aware that they had passed out under the shining Sun. Suddenly he heard 
the sound of many voices all around him. 


toward the northern borders to guard against any attack from Moria; and they 
brought news, some of which Haldir reported. The marauding ores had been 
waylaid and almost all destroyed; the remnant had fled westward towards the 

running with bent back and with hands near the ground, like a beast and yet 
notofbeast-shape.lt had eluded capture, and they had not shot it, not 
knowing whether it was good or ill, and it had vanished down the Silverlode 





'Also,' said Haldir, "they bring me a message from the Lord and Lady of 

the Lady knows who and what is each member of your Company. New 




He removed the bandage first from Gimli' s eyes. 'Your pardon! ' he 
said, bowing low. "Look on us now with friendly eyes! Look and be glad, for 
you are the first dwarf to behold the trees of the Naith of Lurien since 


When his eyes were in turn uncovered, Frodo looked up and caught his 

mound, covered with a sward of grass as green as Spring-time in the Elder 
Days. Upon it, as a double crown, grew two circles of trees: the outer had 

nakedness; the inner were mallorn-trees of great height, still arrayed in 
pale gold. High amid the branches of a towering tree that stood in the 
centre of all there gleamed a white flet. At the feet of the trees, and all 

shaped like stars. Among them, nodding on slender stalks, were other 
flowers, white and palest green: they glimmered as a mist amid the rich hue 
of the grass. Over all the sky was blue, and the sun of afternoon glowed 


'Behold! You are come to Cerin Amroth,' said Haldir. "For this is the 
heart of the ancient realm as it was long ago, and here is the mound of 

winter flowers in the unfading grass: the yellow elanor, and the pale 
niphredil. Here we will stay awhile, and come to the city of the Galadhrim 


The others cast themselves down upon the fragrant grass, but Frodo 

through a high window that looked on a vanished world. A light was upon it 
for which his language had no name. All that he saw was shapely, but the 
shapes seemed at once clear cut, as if they had been first conceived and 

ever. He saw no colour but those he knew, gold and white and blue and green, 
but they were fresh and poignant, as if he had at that moment first 




perceived them and made for them names new and wonderful. In winter here 


heart could mourn for summer or for spring. No blemish or sickness or 

Lurien there was no stain. 


with a puzzled expression, and rubbing his eyes as if he was not sure that 
he was awake. 'It's sunlight and bright day, right enough,' he said. 'I 
thought that Elves were all for moon and stars: but this is more elvish than 



Haldir looked at them, and he seemed indeed to take the meaning of both 
thought and word. He smiled. 'You feel the power of the Lady of the 
Galadhrim,' he said. 'Would it please you to climb with me up Cerin Amroth? 




Though he walked and breathed, and about him living leaves and flowers were 
stirred by the same cool wind as fanned his face, Frodo felt that he was in 
a timeless land that did not fade or change or fall into forgetfulness. When 

from the Shire would walk there, upon the grass among elanor and niphredil 


They entered the circle of white trees. As they did so the South Wind 
blew upon Cerin Amroth and sighed among the branches. Frodo stood still, 
hearing far off_ great seas upon beaches that had long ago been washed away, 


Haldir had gone on and was now climbing to the high flet. As Frodo 
prepared to follow him, he laid his hand upon the tree beside the ladder: 

texture of a tree's skin and of the life within it. He felt a delight in 
wood and the touch of it, neither as forester nor as carpenter; it was the 


As he stepped out at last upon the lofty platform, Haldir took his hand 
and turned him toward the South. 'Look this way first! ’ he said. 


trees, or a city of green towers: which it was he could not tell. Out of it, 
it seemed to him that the power and light came that held all the land in 




sway. He longed suddenly to fly like a bird to rest in the green city. Then 
he looked eastward and saw all the land of Lurien running down to the pale 

all the light went out, and he was back again in the world he knew. Beyond 
the river the land appeared flat and empty, formless and vague, until far 
away it rose again like a wall, dark and drear. The sun that lay on 


'There lies the fastness of Southern Mirkwood,' said Haldir. 'It is 
clad in a forest of dark fir, where the trees strive one against another and 

Guldur, where long the hidden Enemy had his dwelling. We fear that now it is 
inhabited again, and with power sevenfold. A black cloud lies often over it 
of late. In this high place you may see the two powers that are opposed one 
to another; and ever they strive now in thought, but whereas the light 

discovered. Not yet.' He turned and climbed swiftly down, and they followed 


At the hill's foot Frodo found Aragorn, standing still and silent as a 
tree; but in his hand was a small golden bloom of elanor, and a light was in 

knew that he beheld things as they once had been in this same place. For the 
grim years were removed from the face of Aragorn, and he seemed clothed in 
white, a young lord tall and fair; and he spoke words in the Elvish tongue 

he drew a breath, and returning out of his thought he looked at Frodo and 


'Here is the heart of Elvendom on earth,' he said, 'and here my heart 
dwells ever, unless there be a light beyond the dark roads that we still 

left the hill of Cerin Amroth and came there never again as living man. 




Chapter 7 . The Mirror of Galadriel 




deepening in the woods, when they went on again. Their paths now went into 
thickets where the dusk had already gathered. Night came beneath the trees 


Suddenly they came out into the open again and found themselves under a 
pale evening sky pricked by a few early stars. There was a wide treeless 
space before them, running in a great circle and bending away on either 

brink was green, as if it glowed still in memory of the sun that had gone. 
Upon the further side there rose to a great height a green wall encircling a 
green hill thronged with mallorn-trees taller than any they had yet seen in 

twilight like living towers. In their, many -tiered branches and amid their 
ever-moving leaves countless lights were gleaming, green and gold and 


'Welcome to Caras Galadhon! ' he said. 'Here is the city of the 
Galadhrim where dwell the Lord Celeborn and Galadriel the Lady of Lurien. 
But we cannot enter here, for the gates do not look northward. We must go 



There was a road paved with white stone running on the outer brink of 
the fosse. Along this they went westward, with the city ever climbing up 
like a green cloud upon their left; and as the night deepened more lights 

to a white bridge, and crossing found the great gates of the city: they 
faced south-west, set between the ends of the encircling wall that here 



guards Lrodo could see no sign. The travellers passed within, and the gates 
shut behind them. They were in a deep lane between the ends of the wall, and 
passing quickly through it they entered the City of the Trees. No folk could 

about them, and in the air above. Ear away up on the hill they could hear 




the sound of singing falling from on high like soft rain upon leaves. 


the high places and saw before them amid a wide lawn a fountain shimmering. 
It was lit by silver lamps that swung from the boughs of trees, and it fell 
into a basin of silver, from which a white stream spilled. Upon the south 

smooth bole gleamed like grey silk, and up it towered, until its first 
branches, far above, opened their huge limbs under shadowy clouds of leaves. 
Beside it a broad white ladder stood, and at its foot three Elves were 

were tall and clad in grey mail, and from their shoulders hung long white 


'Here dwell Celeborn and Galadriel,' said Haldir. v It is their wish 



was answered three times from far above. V I will go first,' said Haldir. 

'Let Frodo come next and with him Legolas. The others may follow as they 

but you may rest upon the way.' 

As he climbed slowly up Frodo passed many flets: some on one side, some 

passed through them. At a great height above the ground he came to a wide 
talan, like the deck of a great ship. On it was built a house, so large that 
almost it would have served for a hall of Men upon the earth. He entered 

midst of which grew the trunk of the great mallorn, now tapering towards its 
crown, and yet making still a pillar of wide girth. 


silver and its roof of gold. Many Elves were seated there. On two chairs 
beneath the bole of the tree and canopied by a living bough there sat, side 
by side, Celeborn and Galadriel. They stood up to greet their guests, after 

they were, and the Lady no less tall than the Lord; and they were grave and 
beautiful. They were clad wholly in white; and the hair of the Lady was of 
deep gold, and the hair of the Lord Celeborn was of silver long and bright; 

eyes; for these were keen as lances in the starlight, and yet profound, the 






Haldir led Frodo before them, and the Lord welcomed him in his own 
tongue. The Lady Galadriel said no word but looked long upon his face. 

'Sit now beside my chair, Frodo of the Shire! ' said Celeborn. 'When 


Each of the companions he greeted courteously by name as they entered. 

of the world outside since you came to this land; and those years lie heavy 
on you. But the end is near, for good or ill. Here lay aside your burden for 


'Welcome son of Thranduil! Too seldom do my kindred journey hither from 


'Welcome Gimli son of Gluin! It is long indeed since we saw one of 

it be a sign that though the world is now dark better days are at hand, and 
that friendship shall be renewed between our peoples.' Gimli bowed low. 

When all the guests were seated before his chair the Lord looked at 

the messages. But maybe there has been some change of counsel that we have 
not heard. Elrond is far away, and darkness gathers between us, and all this 


'Nay, there was no change of counsel,' said the Lady Galadriel speaking 
for the first time. Her voice was clear and musical, but deeper than woman's 
wont. 'Gandalf the Grey set out with the Company, but he did not pass the 

with him again. But I cannot see him from afar, unless he comes within the 
fences of Lothlurien: a grey mist is about him, and the ways of his feet and 


'Alas! ' said Aragorn. 'Gandalf the Grey fell into shadow. He remained 


At these words all the Elves in the hall cried aloud in grief and 
amazement. 'These are evil tidings,' said Celeborn, 'the most evil that have 
been spoken here in long years full of grievous deeds.' He turned to Haldir. 



'We have not spoken to Haldir of our deeds or our purpose,' said 
Legolas. 'At first we were weary and danger was too close behind and 




afterwards we almost forgot our grief for a time, as we walked in gladness 


'Yet our grief is great and our loss cannot be mended,' said Frodo. 

seemed beyond hope he saved us, and he fell.’ 



Then Aragorn recounted all that had happened upon the pass of 
Caradhras, and in the days that followed; and he spoke of Balin and his 

bridge, and the coming of the Terror. 'An evil of the Ancient World it 
seemed, such as I have never seen before,' said Aragorn. 'It was both a 


'It was a Balrog of Morgoth,' said Legolas; 'of all elf-banes the most 
deadly, save the One who sits in the Dark Tower.’ 


saw Durin's Bane,' said Gimli in a low voice, and dread was in his eyes. 

'Alas! ' said Celeborn. 'We long have feared that under Caradhras a 

Moria again, 1 would have forbidden you to pass the northern borders, you 
and all that went with you. And if it were possible, one would say that at 
the last Gandalf fell from wisdom into folly, going needlessly into the net 


'He would be rash indeed that said that thing,' said Galadriel gravely. 

knew not his mind and cannot report his full purpose. But however it may be 
with the guide, the followers are blameless. Do not repent of your welcome 
to the Dwarf. If our folk had been exiled long and far from Lothlurien, who 



to look upon their ancient home, though it had become an abode of dragons? 

'Dark is the water of Kheled-zvram, and cold are the springs of 
Kibil-nvla, and fair were the many -pillared halls of Khazad-dym in Elder 

Gimli, who sat glowering and sad, and she smiled. And the Dwarf, hearing the 
names given in his own ancient tongue, looked up and met her eyes; and it 
seemed to him that he looked suddenly into the heart of an enemy and saw 





in answer. 


the living land of Lurien, and the Lady Galadriel is above all the jewels 


There was a silence. At length Celeborn spoke again. 'I did not know 
that your plight was so evil,’ he said. 'Let Gimli forget my harsh words: I 
spoke in the trouble of my heart. I will do what I can to aid you, each 

who bears the burden.' 


will not here speak of it more openly. Yet not in vain will it prove, maybe, 
that you came to this land seeking aid, as Gandalf himself plainly purposed. 
For the Lord of the Galadhrim is accounted the wisest of the Elves of 

in the West since the days of dawn, and I have dwelt with him years 
uncounted; for ere the fall of Nargothrond or Gondolin I passed over the 
mountains, and together through ages of the world we have fought the long 



not gone amiss, it would have been governed by Gandalf the Grey, and then 
mayhap things would have gone otherwise. But even now there is hope left. I 
will not give you counsel, saying do this, or do that. For not in doing or 

but only in knowing what was and is, and in part also what shall be. But 
this I will say to you: your Quest stands upon the edge of a knife. Stray 
but a little and it will fail, to the ruin of all. Yet hope remains while 


And with that word she held them with her eyes, and in silence looked 

long endure her glance. Sam quickly blushed and hung his head. 

At length the Lady Galadriel released them from her eyes, and she 

sleep in peace.' Then they sighed and felt suddenly weary, as those who have 
been questioned long and deeply, though no words had been spoken openly. 

'Go now! ' said Celeborn. 'You are worn with sorrow and much toil. Even 

City, until you were healed and refreshed. Now you shall rest, and we will 




not speak of your further road for a while.' 


of the hobbits. The Elves spread for them a pavilion among the trees near 
the fountain, and in it they laid soft couches; then speaking words of peace 
with fair elvish voices they left them. For a little while the travellers 
talked of their night before in the tree-tops, and of their day's journey, 



'What did you blush for, Sam? ’ said Pippin. 'You soon broke down. 
Anyone would have thought you had a guilty conscience. I hope it was nothing 


'I never thought no such thing,’ answered Sam, in no mood for jest. ’If 
you want to know, I felt as if I hadn’t got nothing on, and I didn't like 
it. She seemed to be looking inside me and asking me what I would do if she 

with-with a bit of garden of my own.' 

'That's funny,' said Merry. 'Almost exactly what I felt myself; only, 


All of them, it seemed, had fared alike: each had felt that he was 
offered a choice between a shadow full of fear that lay ahead, and something 

only to turn aside from the road and leave the Quest and the war against 


'And it seemed to me, too,' said Gimli, 'that my choice would remain 


'To me it seemed exceedingly strange,' said Boromir. 'Maybe it was only 
a test, and she thought to read our thoughts for her own good purpose; but 
almost I should have said that she was tempting us, and offering what she 

listen. The Men of Minas Tirith are true to their word.’ But what he thought 
that the Lady had offered him Boromir did not tell. 

And as for Frodo, he would not speak, though Boromir pressed him with 


'Yes,' said Frodo; 'but whatever came into my mind then I will keep 


'Well, have a care! 'said Boromir. 'I do not feel too sure of this 





'Speak no evil of the Lady Galadriel! ' said Aragorn sternly. 'You know 
not what you say. There is in her and in this land no evil, unless a man 

without fear for the first time since I left Rivendell. And may I sleep 
deep, and forget for a while my grief! I am weary in body and in heart.' He 


The others soon did the same, and no sound or dream disturbed their 
slumber. When they woke they found that the light of day was broad upon the 
lawn before the pavilion, and the fountain rose and fell glittering in the 



remember. All the while that they dwelt there the sun shone clear, save for 
a gentle rain that fell at times, and passed away leaving all things fresh 
and clean. The air was cool and soft, as if it were early spring, yet they 
felt about them the deep and thoughtful quiet of winter. It seemed to them 



They had not seen the Lord and Lady again, and they had little speech 
with the Elven-folk; for few of these knew or would use the Westron tongue. 
Haldir had bidden them farewell and gone back again to the fences of the 

Company had brought. Legolas was away much among the Galadhrim, and 


the first night he did not sleep with the other companions, though he 
returned to eat and talk with them. Often he took Gimli with him when he 


Now as the companions sat or walked together they spoke of Gandalf, and 
all that each had known and seen of him came clear before their minds. As 
they were healed of hurt and weariness of body the grief of their loss grew 

were making songs of lamentation for his fall, for they caught his name 
among the sweet sad words that they could not understand. 


loved to call him. But if Legolas was with the Company, he would not 
interpret the songs for them, saying that he had not the skill, and that for 
him the grief was still too near, a matter for tears and not yet for song. 






He was seldom moved to make song or rhyme; even in Ri vendell he had 


and had not sung himself, though his memory was stored with many things that 
others had made before him. But now as he sat beside the fountain in Lurien 
and heard about him the voices of the Elves, his thought took shape in a 

snatches remained, faded as a handful of withered leaves. 


his footsteps on the Hill were heard; 



From Wilderland to Western shore, 


and darkling woods he walked at will. 



with bird on bough and beast in den, 


A deadly sword, a healing hand, 


a weary pilgrim on the road. 



an old man in a battered hat 



and Fire and Shadow both defied; 



'Why, you'll be beating Mr. Bilbo next! ' said Sam. 




'No, I am afraid not,' said Frodo. 'But that is the best I can do yet.' 


about his fireworks,' said Sam. 'Something like this: 


they burst in stars of blue and green, 



Though that doesn't do them justice by a long road.' 


can't talk of it any more. I can't bear to think of bringing the news to 


One evening Frodo and Sam were walking together in the cool twilight. 
Both of them felt restless again. On Frodo suddenly the shadow of parting 
had fallen: he knew somehow that the time was very near when he must leave 



question once before-it seems a very long while ago; but you have seen more 


'I have indeed! ' said Sam. 'And I reckon there's Elves and Elves. 

They're all elvish enough, but they're not all the same. Now these folk 
aren't wanderers or homeless, and seem a bit nearer to the likes of us: they 

made the land, or the land's made them, it's hard to say, if you take my 
meaning. It's wonderfully quiet here. Nothing seems to be going on, and 
nobody seems to want it to. If there's any magic about, it's right down 


'You can see and feel it everywhere,' said Frodo. 

'Well,' said Sam, 'you can't see nobody working it. No fireworks like 

Lady in all these days. I fancy now that she could do some wonderful things, 
if she had a mind. I'd dearly love to see some Elf-magic, Mr. Frodo! ' 


fireworks, but his bushy eyebrows, and his quick temper, and his voice.' 

'You're right,' said Sam. 'And don't think I'm finding fault. I've 
often wanted to see a bit of magic like what it tells of in old tales, but 

a holiday at the same time, if you understand me. I don't want to leave. All 




the same, I'm beginning to feel that if we’ve got to go on, then we'd best 


'It's the job that's never started as takes longest to finish, as my 
old gaffer used to say. And I don't reckon that these folk can do much more 

Gandalf worse, I'm thinking.' 


much that before we leave we shall see the Lady of the Elves again.' 

Even as he spoke, they saw, as if she came in answer to their words, 
the Lady Galadriel approaching. Tall and white and fair she walked beneath 


Turning aside, she led them toward the southern slopes of the hill of 
Caras Galadhon, and passing through a high green hedge they came into an 

evening star had risen and was shining with white fire above the western 
woods. Down a long flight of steps the Lady went into a deep green hollow, 
through which ran murmuring the silver stream that issued from the fountain 

tree, stood a basin of silver, wide and shallow, and beside it stood a 


With water from the stream Galadriel filled the basin to the brim, and 
breathed on it, and when the water was still again she spoke. 'Here is the 

look in it, if you will.' 


him was tall and pale. 'What shall we look for, and what shall we see? ' 


'Many things I can command the Mirror to reveal,' she answered, 'and to 
some I can show what they desire to see. But the Mirror will also show 
things unbidden, and those are often stranger and more profitable than 

free to work, I cannot tell. For it shows things that were, and things that 
are, things that yet may be. But which it is that he sees, even the wisest 


Frodo did not answer. 


call magic. I believe; though I do not understand clearly what they mean; 




and they seem also to use the same word of the deceits of the Enemy. But 
this, if you will, is the magic of Galadriel. Did you not say that you 


'I did,' said Sam, trembling a little between fear and curiosity. Til 


'And I'd not mind a glimpse of what's going on at home,' he said in an 

there, like as not I'll only see the stars, or something that I won't 


'Like as not,' said the Lady with a gentle laugh. 'But come, you shall 
look and see what you may. Do not touch the water! ’ 



The water looked hard and dark. Stars were reflected in it. 

'There's only stars, as I thought,' he said. Then he gave a low gasp, 

grew grey, and then clear. There was sun shining, and the branches of trees 
were waving and tossing in the wind. But before Sam could make up his mind 
what it was that he saw, the light faded; and now he thought he saw Frodo 

to see himself going along a dim passage, and climbing an endless winding 
stair. It came to him suddenly that he was looking urgently for something, 
but what it was he did not know. Like a dream the vision shifted and went 
back, and he saw the trees again. But this time they were not so close, and 

falling, crashing to the ground. 


a-cutting down trees as he shouldn't. They didn't ought to be felled: it's 
that avenue beyond the Mill that shades the road to Bywater. I wish I could 


But now Sam noticed that the Old Mill had vanished, and a large 
red-brick building was being put up where it had stood. Lots of folk were 

cloud the surface of the Mirror. 


he was about when he wanted to send Mr. Merry back.' Then suddenly Sam 


a cry and sprang away. 'I can't stay here,' he said wildly. 'I must go home. 




They’ve dug up Bagshot Row, and there's the poor old gaffer going down the 


’You cannot go home alone,’ said the Lady. ’You did not wish to go home 
without your master before you looked in the Mirror, and yet you knew that 
evil things might well be happening in the Shire. Remember that the Mirror 

unless those that behold the visions turn aside from their path to prevent 
them. The Mirror is dangerous as a guide of deeds.’ 


never come here, and I don’t want to see no more magic,’ he said and fell 
silent. After a moment he spoke again thickly, as if struggling with tears. 

'No, I’ll go home by the long road with Mr. Frodo, or not at all,’ he said. 

'But I hope I do get back some day. If what I’ve seen turns out true, 


'Do you now wish to look, Frodo? ’ said the Lady Galadriel. 'You did 


'Do you advise me to look? ’ asked Frodo. 


counsellor. You may learn something, and whether what you see be fair or 
evil, that may be profitable, and yet it may not. Seeing is both good and 
perilous. Yet I think, Frodo, that you have courage and wisdom enough for 


'I will look,’ said Frodo, and he climbed on the pedestal and bent over 
the dark water. At once the Mirror cleared and he saw a twilit land. 
Mountains loomed dark in the distance against a pale sky. A long grey road 

and small at first, but growing larger and clearer as it approached. 
Suddenly Frodo realized that it reminded him of Gandalf. He almost called 
aloud the wizard’s name, and then he saw that the figure was clothed not in 

hand there was a white staff. The head was so bowed that he could see no 
face, and presently the figure turned aside round a bend in the road and 
went out of the Mirror's view. Doubt came into Frodo's mind: was this a 



The vision now changed. Brief and small but very vivid he caught a 
glimpse of Bilbo walking restlessly about his room. The table was littered 




with disordered papers; rain was beating on the windows. 


Frodo in some way knew to be parts of a great history in which he had become 
involved. The mist cleared and he saw a sight which he had never seen before 
but knew at once: the Sea. Darkness fell. The sea rose and raged in a great 

clouds, the black outline of a tall ship with torn sails riding up out of 
the West. Then a wide river flowing through a populous city. Then a white 
fortress with seven towers. And then again a ship with black sails, but now 

the emblem of a white tree shone in the sun. A smoke as of fire and battle 
arose, and again the sun went down in a burning red that faded into a grey 
mist; and into the mist a small ship passed away, twinkling with lights. It 


But suddenly the Mirror went altogether dark, as dark as if a hole had 
opened in the world of sight, and Frodo looked into emptiness. In the black 

all the Mirror. So terrible was it that Frodo stood rooted, unable to cry 
out or to withdraw his gaze. The Eye was rimmed with fire, but was itself 
glazed, yellow as a cat's, watchful and intent, and the black slit of its 


Then the Eye began to rove, searching this way and that; and Frodo knew 
with certainty and horror that among the many things that it sought he 

unless he willed it. The Ring that hung upon its chain about his neck grew 
heavy, heavier than a great stone, and his head was dragged downwards. The 
Mirror seemed to be growing hot and curls of steam were rising from the 


'Do not touch the water!' said the Lady Galadriel softly. The vision 

the silver basin. He stepped back shaking all over and looked at the Lady. 

V I know what it was that you last saw,' she said; 'for that is also in 
my mind. Do not be afraid! But do not think that only by singing amid the 

Lothlurien maintained and defended against its Enemy. I say to you, Frodo, 
that even as I speak to you, I perceive the Dark Lord and know his mind, or 
all of his mind that concerns the Elves. And he gropes ever to see me and my 






She lifted up her white arms, and spread out her hands towards the East 
in a gesture of rejection and denial. Edrendil, the Evening Star, most 

the Elven-lady cast a dim shadow on the ground. Its rays glanced upon a ring 
about her finger; it glittered like polished gold overlaid with silver 
light, and a white stone in it twinkled as if the Even-star had come down to 

to him that he understood. 


it, and Elrond could not do so. But it cannot be hidden from the 
Ring -bearer, and one who has seen the Eye. Verily it is in the land of 
Lurien upon the finger of Galadriel that one of the Three remains. This is 


'He suspects, but he does not know — not yet. Do you not see now 

then we are laid bare to the Enemy. Yet if you succeed, then our power is 
diminished, and Lothlurien will fade, and the tides of Time will sweep it 
away. We must depart into the West, or dwindle to a rustic folk of dell and 


Frodo bent his head. 'And what do you wish? ' he said at last. 

'That what should be shall be,’ she answered. 'The love of the Elves 

their regret is undying and cannot ever wholly be assuaged. Yet they will 
cast all away rather than submit to Sauron: for they know him now. For the 
fate of Lothlurien you are not answerable but only for the doing of your own 

been wrought, or had remained for ever lost.’ 

'You are wise and fearless and fair, Lady Galadriel,' said Frodo. 'I 



Galadriel laughed with a sudden clear laugh. 'Wise the Lady Galadriel 
may be,' she said, 'yet here she has met her match in courtesy. Gently are 
you revenged for my testing of your heart at our first meeting. You begin to 

what you offer. For many long years I had pondered what I might do, should 
the Great Ring come into my hands, and behold! it was brought within my 




grasp. The evil that was devised long ago works on in many ways, whether 
Sauron himself stands or falls. Would not that have been a noble deed to set 


'And now at last it comes. You will give me the Ring freely! In place 
of the Dark Lord you will set up a Queen. And I shall not be dark, but 
beautiful and terrible as the Morning and the Night! Fair as the Sea and the 



Stronger than the foundations of the earth. All shall love me and despair! ' 

She lifted up her hand and from the ring that she wore there issued a 
great light that illuminated her alone and left all else dark. She stood 

enduring, terrible and worshipful. Then she let her hand fall, and the light 
faded, and suddenly she laughed again, and lo! she was shrunken: a slender 
elf-woman, clad in simple white, whose gentle voice was soft and sad. 




They stood for a long while in silence. At length the Lady spoke again. 

'Let us return! ' she said. 'In the morning you must depart for now we have 


'I would ask one thing before we go,' said Frodo, 'a thing which I 
often meant to ask Gandalf in Rivendell. I am permitted to wear the One 
Ring: why cannot I see all the others and know the thoughts of those that 


'You have not tried,’ she said. 'Only thrice have you set the Ring upon 

you. Did not Gandalf tell you that the rings give power according to the 
measure of each possessor? Before you could use that power you would need 


become far stronger, and to train your will to the domination of others. Yet 

which is hidden, your sight is grown keener. You have perceived my thought 
more clearly than many that are accounted wise. You saw the Eye of him that 
holds the Seven and the Nine. And did you not see and recognize the ring 


'No, Lady,' he answered. 'To tell you the truth, I wondered what you 
were talking about. I saw a star through your finger. But if you'll pardon 




my speaking out, I think my master was right. I wish you'd take his Ring. 

turning him adrift. You'd make some folk pay for their dirty work.' 

'I would,' she said. 'That is how it would begin. But it would not stop 





Chapter 8 . Farewell to Lurien 



That night the Company was again summoned to the chamber of Celeborn, 

spoke of their departure. 


must harden their hearts to leave this land. Those who no longer wish to go 
forward may remain here, for a while. But whether they stay or go, none can 
be sure of peace. For we are come now to the edge of doom. Here those who 

lie open again, or we summon them to the last need of Lurien. Then they may 
return to their own lands, or else go to the long home of those that fall in 


There was a silence. 'They all resolved to go forward,’ said Galadriel 


'As for me,’ said Boromir, 'my way home lies onward and not back.’ 


to Minas Tirith? ’ 


not know what Gandalf intended to do. Indeed I do not think that even he had 


'Maybe not,’ said Celeborn, 'yet when you leave this land, you can no 
longer forget the Great River. As some of you know well, it cannot be 
crossed by travellers with baggage between Lurien and Gondor, save by boat. 

now by the Enemy? 


side, upon the west; but the straight road of the Quest lies east of the 
River, upon the darker shore. Which shore will you now take? ’ 

'If my advice is heeded, it will be the western shore, and the way to 

The others said nothing, and Aragorn looked doubtful and troubled. 

'I see that you do not yet know what to do,’ said Celeborn. 'It is not 






River; and Boromir of Gondor; and Aragorn the traveller.' 

'And one Hobbit! ' cried Merry. 'Not all of us look on boats as wild 


'That is well,’ said Celeborn. 'Then I will furnish your Company with 
boats. They must be small and light, for if you go far by water, there are 

of Sarn Gebir, and maybe at last to the great falls of Rauros where the 
River thunders down from Nen Hithoel; and there are other perils. Boats may 
make your journey less toilsome for awhile. Yet they will not give you 



Aragorn thanked Celeborn many times. The gift of boats comforted him 
much, not least because there would now be no need to decide his course for 
some days. The others, too, looked more hopeful. Whatever perils lay ahead, 

plod forward with bent backs. Only Sam was doubtful: he at any rate still 
thought boats as bad as wild horses, or worse, and not all the dangers that 


'All shall be prepared for you and await you at the haven before noon 
tomorrow,' said Celeborn. 'I will send my people to you in the morning to 
help you make ready for the journey. Now we will wish you all a fair night 


'Good night, my friends! ' said Galadriel. 'Sleep in peace! Do not 

paths that you each shall tread are already laid before your feet, though 


The Company now took their leave and returned to their pavilion. 
Legolas went with them, for this was to be their last night in Lothlurien, 
and in spite of the words of Galadriel they wished to take counsel together. 


best to attempt the fulfilling of their purpose with the Ring: but they came 
to no decision. It was plain that most of them desired to go first to Minas 
Tirith, and to escape at least for a while from the terror of the Enemy. 


shadow of Mordor; but Frodo spoke no word, and Aragorn was still divided in 





His own plan, while Gandalf remained with them, had been to go with 
Boromir, and with his sword help to deliver Gondor. For he believed that the 
message of the dreams was a summons, and that the hour had come at last 



mastery. But in Moria the burden of Gandalf had been laid on him; and he 
knew that he could not now forsake the Ring, if Frodo refused in the end to 
go with Boromir. And yet what help could he or any of the Company give to 


'I shall go to Minas Tirith, alone if need be, for it is my duty,' said 
Boromir; and after that he was silent for a while, sitting with his eyes 

length he spoke again, softly, as if he was debating with himself. 'If you 
wish only to destroy the Ring,’ he said, "then there is little use in war 
and weapons; and the Men of Minas Tirith cannot help. But if you wish to 

force into his domain; and folly to throw away.' He paused suddenly, as if 
he had become aware that he was speaking his thoughts aloud. 'It would be 
folly to throw lives away, I mean,' he ended. 'It is a choice between 

least, that is how I see it.' 


looked hard at him. Plainly Boromir's thought was different from his final 
words. It would be folly to throw away: what? The Ring of Power? He had said 
something like this at the Council, but then he had accepted the correction 

and made no sign that he had heeded Boromir's words. And so their debate 
ended. Merry and Pippin were already asleep, and Sam was nodding. The 




In the morning, as they were beginning to pack their slender goods, 

Elves that could speak their tongue came to them and brought them many gifts 

very thin cakes, made of a meal that was baked a light brown on the outside, 
and inside was the colour of cream. Gimli took up one of the cakes and 


'Cram,' he said under his breath, as he broke off a crisp corner and 




nibbled at it. His expression quickly changed, and he ate all the rest of 


'No more, no more!' cried the Elves laughing. 'You have eaten enough 


'I thought it was only a kind of cram , such as the Dale-men make for 


'So it is,’ they answered. 'But we call it lembas or waybread, and it 
is more strengthening than any food made by Men, and it is more pleasant 


'Indeed it is,’ said Gimli. ’Why it is better than the honey-cakes of 

bakers that I know of; but they are none too willing to deal out their cakes 
to travellers in these days. You are kindly hosts! ’ 

’All the same, we bid you spare the food,’ they said. ’Eat little at a 

else fails. The cakes will keep sweet for many many days, if they are 
unbroken and left in their leaf- wrappings, as we have brought them. One will 
keep a traveller on his feet for a day of long labour, even if he be one of 


The Elves next unwrapped and gave to each of the Company the clothes 

according to his size, of the light but warm silken stuff that the Galadhrim 
wove. It was hard to say of what colour they were: grey with the hue of 
twilight under the trees they seemed to be; and yet if they were moved, or 

fields by night, dusk-silver as water under the stars. Each cloak was 
fastened about the neck with a brooch like a green leaf veined with silver. 

'Are these magic cloaks? ’ asked Pippin, looking at them with wonder. 


Elves. 'They are fair garments, and the web is good, for it was made in this 
land. They are elvish robes certainly, if that is what you mean. Leaf and 
branch, water and stone: they have the hue and beauty of all these things 

that we love into all that we make. Yet they are garments, not armour, and 
they will not turn shaft or blade. But they should serve you well: they are 
light to wear, and warm enough or cool enough at need. And you will find 





walk among the stones or the trees. You are indeed high in the favour of the 
Lady! For she herself and her maidens wove this stuff; and never before have 
we clad strangers in the garb of our own people.' 


fountain. Their hearts were heavy; for it was a fair place, and it had 
become like home to them, though they could not count the days and nights 

water in the sunlight, Haldir came walking towards them over the green grass 
of the glade. Frodo greeted him with delight. 


sent now to be your guide again. The Dimrill Dale is full of vapour and 
clouds of smoke, and the mountains are troubled. There are noises in the 
deeps of the earth. If any of you had thought of returning northwards to 

path now goes south.' 


the trees above them many voices were murmuring and singing. They 


went silently. At last Haldir led them down the southward slopes of the 
hill, and they came again to the great gate hung with lamps, and to the 

they turned away from the paved road and took a path that went off into a 
deep thicket of mallorn-trees, and passed on, winding through rolling 

eastwards, towards the shores of the River. 

They had gone some ten miles and noon was at hand when they came on a 

trees. Before them lay a long lawn of shining grass, studded with golden 
elanor that glinted in the sun. The lawn ran out into a narrow tongue 
between bright margins: on the right and west the Silverlode flowed 

deep and dark. On the further shores the woodlands still marched on 
southwards as far as the eye could see, but all the banks were bleak and 


On the bank of the Silverlode, at some distance up from the meeting of 
the streams, there was a hythe of white stones and white wood. By it were 
moored many boats and barges. Some were brightly painted, and shone with 





grey boats had been made ready for the travellers, and in these the Elves 
stowed their goods. And they added also coils of rope, three to each boat. 
Slender they looked, but strong, silken to the touch, grey of hue like the 


'What are these? ' asked Sam, handling one that lay upon the 



without a rope! And one that is long and strong and light. Such are these. 


'You don't need to tell me that! ' said Sam. I came without any and 
I've been worried ever since. But I was wondering what these were made of, 
knowing a bit about rope -making: it's in the family as you might say.' 


instruct you in the art of their making. Had we known that this craft 
delighted you, we could have taught you much. But now alas! unless you 
should at some time return hither, you must be content with our gift. May it 


'Come! ' said Haldir. 'All is now ready for you. Enter the boats! But 


'Heed the words! ' said the other Elves. 'These boats are light-built, 

lade them as you will; but they are wayward if mishandled. It would be wise 
if you accustomed yourselves to stepping in and out, here where there is a 


The Company was arranged in this way: Aragorn, Frodo, and Sam were in 
one boat; Boromir, Merry, and Pippin in another; and in the third were 

of the goods and packs were stowed. The boats were moved and steered with 
short-handled paddles that had broad leaf-shaped blades. When all was ready 
Aragorn led them on a trial up the Silverlode. The current was swift and 

looking back wistfully to the shore. The sunlight glittering on the water 
dazzled his eyes. As they passed beyond the green field of the Tongue, the 
trees drew down to the river's brink. Here and there golden leaves tossed 
and floated on the rippling stream. The air was very bright and still, and 





They turned a sharp bend in the river, and there, sailing proudly down 
the stream toward them, they saw a swan of great size. The water rippled on 

like burnished gold, and its eyes glinted like jet set in yellow stones; its 
huge white wings were half lifted. A music came down the river as it drew 
nearer; and suddenly they perceived that it was a ship, wrought and carved 

it with black paddles. In the midst of the vessel sat Celeborn, and behind 
him stood Galadriel, tall and white; a circlet of golden flowers was in her 
hair, and in her hand she held a harp, and she sang. Sad and sweet was the 


I sang of leaves, of leaves of gold, and leaves of gold there grew: 

Of wind I sang, a wind there came and in the branches blew. 



And by the strand of Ilmarin there grew a golden Tree. 



In Eldamar beside the walls of Elven Tirion. 



While here beyond the Sundering Seas now fall the Elven-tears. 

O Lurien! The Winter comes, the bare and leafless Day; 



O Lurien! Too long I have dwelt upon this Hither Shore 


But if of ships I now should sing, what ship would come to me, 

What ship would bear me ever back across so wide a Sea? 


her song and greeted them. 'We have come to bid you our last farewell,' she 
said, 'and to speed you with blessings from our land.’ 


eaten with us, and we bid you, therefore, to a parting feast, here between 
the flowing waters that will bear you far from Lurien.' 


followed it. There in the last end of Egladil upon the green grass the 
parting feast was held; but Frodo ate and drank little, heeding only the 
beauty of the Lady and her voice. She seemed no longer perilous or terrible, 

days Elves still at times are seen: present and yet remote, a living vision 




of that which has already been left far behind by the flowing streams of 


After they had eaten and drunk, sitting upon the grass, Celeborn spoke 
to them again of their journey, and lifting his hand he pointed south to the 


'As you go down the water,' he said, 'you will find that the trees will 

vale amid high moors, until at last after many leagues it comes to the tall 
island of the Tindrock, that we call Tol Brandir. There it casts its arms 
about the steep shores of the isle, and falls then with a great noise and 

is called in your tongue. That is a wide region of sluggish fen where the 
stream becomes tortuous and much divided. There the Entwash flows in by 


mouths from the Forest of Fangorn in the west. About that stream, on this 

of the Emyn Muil. The wind blows from the East there, for they look out over 
the Dead Marshes and the Noman-lands to Cirith Gorgor and the black gates of 


'Boromir, and any that go with him seeking Minas Tirith, will do well 
to leave the Great River above Rauros and cross the Entwash before it finds 

becoming entangled in the Forest of Fangorn. That is a strange land, and is 
now little known. But Boromir and Aragorn doubtless do not need this 


'Indeed we have heard of Fangorn in Minas Tirith,' said Boromir. 'But 

tell to our children. All that lies north of Rohan is now to us so far away 
that fancy can wander freely there. Of old Fangorn lay upon the borders of 
our realm; but it is now many lives of men since any of us visited it, to 


'I have myself been at whiles in Rohan, but I have never crossed it 
northwards. When I was sent out as a messenger, I passed through the Gap by 
the skirts of the White Mountains, and crossed the Isen and the Grey flood 

reckoned it, and it took me many months; for I lost my horse at Tharbad, at 
the fording of the Greyflood. After that journey, and the road I have 




trodden with this Company, I do not much doubt that I shall find a way 


'Then I need say no more,' said Celeborn. 'But do not despise the lore 
that has come down from distant years; for oft it may chance that old wives 


Now Galadriel rose from the grass, and taking a cup from one of her 
maidens she filled it with white mead and gave it to Celeborn. 


of the Galadhrim! And let not your heart be sad though night must follow 
noon, and already our evening draweth nigh.’ 


and farewell. But when they had drunk she commanded them to sit again on the 
grass, and chairs were set for her and for Celeborn. Her maidens stood 
silent about her, and a while she looked upon her guests. At last she spoke 



between us. But before you go, I have brought in my ship gifts which the 
Lord and Lady of the Galadhrim now offer you in memory of Lothlurien.' 





'Here is the gift of Celeborn and Galadriel to the leader of your 
Company,' she said to Aragorn, and she gave him a sheath that had been made 

wrought of silver and gold, and on it were set in elven runes formed of many 
gems the name And®ril and the lineage of the sword. 


broken even in defeat,' she said. 'But is there aught else that you desire 
of me at our parting? For darkness will flow between us, and it may be that 
we shall not meet again, unless it be far hence upon a road that has no 



keeping the only treasure that I seek. Yet it is not yours to give me, even 
if you would; and only through darkness shall I come to it.' 

'Yet maybe this will lighten your heart,' said Galadriel; 'for it was 

she lifted from her lap a great stone of a clear green, set in a silver 
brooch that was wrought in the likeness of an eagle with outspread wings; 




and as she held it up the gem flashed like the sun shining through the 

hers; and now it comes to you as a token of hope. In this hour take the name 
that was foretold for you, Elessar, the Elfstone of the house of Elendil! ’ 

Then Aragorn took the stone and pinned the brooch upon his breast, and 

kingly he stood, and it seemed to them that many years of toil had fallen 
from his shoulders. 'For the gifts that you have given me I thank you,’ he 
said, 'O Lady of Lurien of whom were sprung Celebrnan and Arwen 




The Lady bowed her head, and she turned then to Boromir, and to him she 
gave a belt of gold; and to Merry and Pippin she gave small silver belts, 

such as the Galadhrim used, longer and stouter than the bows of Mirkwood, 
and strung with a string of elf-hair. With it went a quiver of arrows. 


only a small gift.’ She put into his hand a little box of plain grey wood, 
unadorned save for a single silver rune upon the lid. 'Here is set G for 
Galadriel,' she said; 'but also it may stand for garden in your tongue. In 
this box there is earth from my orchard, and such blessing as Galadriel has 

you against any peril; but if you keep it and see your home again at last, 
then perhaps it may reward you. Though you should find all barren and laid 
waste, there will be few gardens in Middle-earth that will bloom like your 

and catch a glimpse far off of Lurien, that you have seen only in our 
winter. For our spring and our summer are gone by, and they will never be 


Sam went red to the ears and muttered something inaudible, as he 


'And what gift would a Dwarf ask of the Elves? ' said Galadriel turning 


'None, Lady,’ answered Gimli. 'It is enough for me to have seen the 


'Hear all ye Elves! ’ she cried to those about her. 'Let none say again 
that Dwarves are grasping and ungracious! Yet surely, Gimli son of Gluin, 




you desire something that I could give? Name it, I bid you! You shall not be 


'There is nothing, Lady Galadriel,' said Gimli, bowing low and 
stammering. 'Nothing, unless it might be-unless it is permitted to ask. nay, 

as the stars surpass the gems of the mine. I do not ask for such a gift. But 
you commanded me to name my desire.’ 


the Dwarf in wonder, but the Lady smiled. ’It is said that the skill of the 
Dwarves is in their hands rather than in their tongues ’ she said; 'yet that 
is not true of Gimli. For none have ever made to me a request so bold and 

But tell me, what would you do with such a gift? ’ 

'Treasure it, Lady,’ he answered, 'in memory of your words to me at our 

set in imperishable crystal to be an heirloom of my house, and a pledge of 
good will between the Mountain and the Wood until the end of days.’ 

Then the Lady unbraided one of her long tresses, and cut off three 

gift,’ she said. 'I do not foretell, for all foretelling is now vain: on the 
one hand lies darkness, and on the other only hope. But if hope should not 
fail, then I say to you, Gimli son of Gluin, that your hands shall flow with 


'And you, Ring-bearer,’ she said, turning to Frodo. 'I come to you last 
who are not last in my thoughts. For you I have prepared this.’ She held up 
a small crystal phial: it glittered as she moved it, and rays of white light 

Edrendil’s star, set amid the waters of my fountain. It will shine still 
brighter when night is about you. May it be a light to you in dark places, 
when all other lights go out. Remember Galadriel and her Mirror! ’ 


her again standing like a queen, great and beautiful, but no longer 


Now the Lady arose, and Celeborn led them back to the hythe. A yellow 
noon lay on the green land of the Tongue, and the water glittered with 
silver. All at last was made ready. The Company took their places in the 





thrust them out into the flowing stream, and the rippling waters bore them 
slowly away. The travellers sat still without moving or speaking. On the 
green bank near to the very point of the Tongue the Lady Galadriel stood 

slowly floating away from them. For so it seemed to them: Lurien was 
slipping backward, like a bright ship masted with enchanted trees, sailing 
on to forgotten shores, while they sat helpless upon the margin of the grey 


Even as they gazed, the Silverlode passed out into the currents of the 

white form of the Lady was small and distant. She shone like a window of 
glass upon a far hill in the westering sun, or as a remote lake seen from a 
mountain: a crystal fallen in the lap of the land. Then it seemed to Frodo 

the following wind came the sound of her voice singing. But now she sang in 
the ancient tongue of the Elves beyond the Sea, and he did not understand 
the words: fair was the music, but it did not comfort him. 


and long afterwards he interpreted them, as well as he could: the language 
was that of Elven-song and spoke of things little known on Middle-earth. 



Yjni ®nutiml ve rbmar aldaron! 




nu luini yassen tintilar i eleni 




An sn Tintalll Varda Oiolosslo 


ar sindanuriello caita mornil 



Si vanwa nb, Rumello vanwa, Valimar! 








'Ah! like gold fall the leaves in the wind, long years numberless as 
the wings of trees ! The long years have passed like swift draughts of the 
sweet mead in lofty halls beyond the West, beneath the blue vaults of Varda 

now shall refill the cup for me? For now the Kindler, Varda, the Queen of 
the Stars, from Mount Everwhite has uplifted her hands like clouds, and all 
paths are drowned deep in shadow; and out of a grey country darkness lies on 

ever. Now lost, lost to those from the East is Valimar! Farewell! Maybe thou 
shalt find Valimar. Maybe even thou shalt find it. Farewell! ' Varda is the 
name of that Fady whom the Elves in these lands of exile name Elbereth. 


side, and the light of Furien was hidden. To that fair land Frodo never came 


The travellers now turned their faces to the journey; the sun was 
before them, and their eyes were dazzled, for all were filled with tears. 



'I have looked the last upon that which was fairest,' he said to 

her gift.' He put his hand to his breast. 


where the chief peril lay! Truly Elrond spoke, saying that we could not 
foresee what we might meet upon our road. Torment in the dark was the danger 
that I feared, and it did not hold me back. But I would not have come, had I 

parting, even if I were to go this night straight to the Dark Ford. Alas for 
Gimli son of Gluin! ’ 


in these after-days. For such is the way of it: to find and lose, as it 
seems to those whose boat is on the running stream. But I count you blessed, 
Gimli son of Gluin: for your loss you suffer of your own free will, and you 



the least reward that you shall have is that the memory of Fothlurien shall 
remain ever clear and unstained in your heart, and shall neither fade nor 






'Maybe,' said Gimli; 'and I thank you for your words. True words 

desires. That is only a mirror, be it clear as Kheled-zvram. Or so says the 
heart of Gimli the Dwarf. Elves may see things otherwise. Indeed I have 
heard that for them memory is more like to the waking world than to a dream. 


'But let us talk no more of it. Look to the boat! She is too low in the 

drown my grief in cold water.' He took up a paddle, and steered towards the 
western bank, following Aragorn's boat ahead, which had already moved out of 


So the Company went on their long way, down the wide hurrying waters, 
borne ever southwards. Bare woods stalked along either bank, and they could 

flowed without a sound. No voice of bird broke the silence. The sun grew 
misty as the day grew old, until it gleamed in a pale sky like a high white 
pearl. Then it faded into the West, and dusk came early, followed by a grey 

their boats under the overhanging shadows of the western woods. Great trees 
passed by like ghosts, thrusting their twisted thirsty roots through the 
mist down into the water. It was dreary and cold. Frodo sat and listened to 

driftwood near the shore, until his head nodded and he fell into an uneasy 





Chapter 9 . The Great River 




under tall grey -skinned trees in a quiet corner of the woodlands on the west 
bank of the Great River, Anduin. He had slept the night away, and the grey 
of morning was dim among the bare branches. Gimli was busy with a small fire 


They started again before the day was broad. Not that most of the 

which they must make at latest when they came to Rauros and the Tindrock 
Isle, still lay some days ahead; and they let the River bear them on at its 
own pace, having no desire to hasten towards the perils that lay beyond, 

stream as they wished, husbanding their strength against weariness to come. 
But he insisted that at least they should start early each day and journey 
on far into the evening; for he felt in his heart that time was pressing, 



Nonetheless they saw no sign of an enemy that day, nor the next. The 
dull grey hours passed without event. As the third day of their voyage wore 
on the lands changed slowly: the trees thinned and then failed altogether. 


up and away toward the sky; brown and withered they looked, as if fire had 
passed over them, leaving no living blade of green: an unfriendly waste 
without even a broken tree or a bold stone to relieve the emptiness. They 

Mirkwood and the hills of the Emyn Muil. What pestilence or war or evil deed 
of the Enemy had so blasted all that region even Aragorn could not tell. 

Upon the west to their right the land was treeless also, but it was 

the River they passed forests of great reeds, so tall that they shut out all 
view to the west, as the little boats went rustling by along their 
fluttering borders. Their dark withered plumes bent and tossed in the light 

could catch sudden glimpses of rolling meads, and far beyond them hills in 




the sunset, and away on the edge of sight a dark line, where marched the 


There was no sign of living moving things, save birds. Of these there 
were many: small fowl whistling and piping in the reeds, but they were 

swan-wings, and looking up they saw a great phalanx streaming along the sky. 
'Swans! ' said Sam. 'And mighty big ones too! ’ 



'How wide and empty and mournful all this country looks! ’ said Frodo. 

'I always imagined that as one journeyed south it got warmer and merrier, 


’But we have not journeyed far south yet,’ answered Aragorn. 'It is 
still winter, and we are far from the sea. Here the world is cold until the 
sudden spring, and we may yet have snow again. Far away down in the Bay of 

for the Enemy. But here we are not above sixty leagues, I guess, south of 
the Southfarthing away in your Shire, hundreds of long miles yonder. You are 
looking now south-west across the north plains of the Riddermark, Rohan the 

that runs down from Fangorn to join the Great River. That is the north 
boundary of Rohan; and of old all that lay between Limlight and the White 
Mountains belonged to the Rohirrim. It is a rich and pleasant land, and its 

ride often to its shores. Anduin is wide, yet the ores can shoot their 
arrows far across the stream; and of late, it is said, they have dared to 


Sam looked from bank to bank uneasily. The trees had seemed hostile 
before, as if they harboured secret eyes and lurking dangers; now he wished 
that the trees were still there. He felt that the Company was too naked, 

river that was the frontier of war. 


this feeling of insecurity grew on all the Company. For a whole day they 
took to their paddles and hastened forward. The banks slid by. Soon the 
River broadened and grew more shallow; long stony beaches lay upon the east, 

needed. The Brown Lands rose into bleak wolds, over which flowed a chill air 




from the East. On the other side the meads had become rolling downs of 
withered grass amidst a land of fen and tussock. Frodo shivered, thinking of 
the lawns and fountains, the clear sun and gentle rains of Lothlurien. There 

Company was busy with his own thoughts. 


some northern glade amid the beech- woods; Gimli was fingering gold in his 
mind, and wondering if it were fit to be wrought into the housing of the 
Lady's gift. Merry and Pippin in the middle boat were ill at ease, for 

restlessness or doubt consumed him, sometimes seizing a paddle and driving 
the boat close behind Aragorn's. Then Pippin, who sat in the bow looking 
back, caught a queer gleam in his eye, as he peered forward gazing at Frodo. 

dangerous as he had been brought up to believe, they were far more 
uncomfortable than even he had imagined. Fie was cramped and miserable, 
having nothing to do but stare at the winter -lands crawling by and the grey 

trust Sam with one. 


heads of Frodo and Aragorn and the following boats; he was drowsy and 


for camp and the feel of earth under his toes. Suddenly something caught his 
sight: at first he stared at it listlessly, then he sat up and rubbed his 


That night they camped on a small eyot close to the western bank. Sam 
lay rolled in blankets beside Frodo. V I had a funny dream an hour or two 

it was anyway.' 


down until he had told his tale, whatever it was. 'I haven't seen or thought 
of anything to make me smile since we left Lothlurien.' 


wasn't a dream. And you had best hear it. It was like this: I saw a log with 


'The log's all right,' said Frodo. 'There are many in the River. But 





'That I won't,' said Sam. ' 'Twas the eyes as made me sit up, so to 
speak. I saw what I took to be a log floating along in the half-light behind 
Gimli's boat; but I didn't give much heed to it. Then it seemed as if the 

seeing as we were all floating on the stream together. Just then I saw the 
eyes: two pale sort of points, shiny -like, on a hump at the near end of the 
log. What's more, it wasn't a log, for it had paddle-feet, like a swan's 


'That's when I sat right up and rubbed my eyes, meaning to give a 
shout, if it was still there when I had rubbed the drowse out of my head. 


Gimli. But whether those two lamps spotted me moving and staring, or whether 
I came to my senses, I don't know. When I looked again, it wasn't there. Yet 
I think I caught a glimpse with the tail of-my eye, as the saying is, of 
something dark shooting under the shadow of the bank. I couldn't see no more 



more just then. But I've been thinking since, and now I'm not so sure. What 
do you make of it, Mr. Frodo? ' 


eyes Sam, said Frodo, if this was the first time that those eyes had been 
seen. But it isn't. I saw them away back north before we reached Lurien. And 
I saw a strange creature with eyes climbing to the flet that night. Haldir 



'Ah,' said Sam. 'I do; and I remember more too. I don't like my 
thoughts; but thinking of one thing and another, and Mr. Bilbo's stories and 
all, I fancy I could put a name on the creature, at a guess. A nasty name. 


'Yes, that is what I have feared for some time,' said Frodo. 'Ever 

up our trail then; but I hoped that our stay in Lurien would throw him off 
the scent again. The miserable creature must have been hiding in the woods 


'That's about it,' said Sam. 'And we'd better be a bit more watchful 
ourselves, or we'll feel some nasty fingers round our necks one of these 






can sleep tomorrow, being no more than luggage in a boat, as you might say.' 

V I might,' said Frodo, 'and I might say "luggage with eyes". You shall 
watch; but only if you promise to wake me halfway towards morning, if 


In the dead hours Frodo came out of a deep dark sleep to find Sam 

said. There's nothing to tell, or not much. I thought I heard some soft 
plashing and a sniffing noise, a while back; but you hear a lot of such 


He lay down, and Frodo sat up, huddled in his blankets, and fought off 
his sleep. Minutes or hours passed slowly, and nothing happened. Frodo was 

visible, floated close to one of the moored boats. A long whitish hand could 
be dimly seen as it shot out and grabbed the gunwale; two pale lamplike eyes 
shone coldly as they peered inside, and then they lifted and gazed up at 

heard the soft hiss of intaken breath. He stood up, drawing Sting from its 
sheath, and faced the eyes. Immediately their light was shut off. There was 
another hiss and a splash, and the dark log-shape shot away downstream into 


'What is it? ' he whispered, springing up and coming to Frodo. 'I felt 
something in my sleep. Why have you drawn your sword? ' 



'Ah! ' said Aragorn. 'So you know about our little footpad, do you? He 
padded after us all through Moria and right down to Nimrodel. Since we took 

have tried to catch him once or twice at night; but he is slier than a fox, 
and as slippery as a fish. I hoped the river-voyage would beat him, but he 


'We shall have to try going faster tomorrow. You lie down now, and I 
will keep watch for what is left of the night. I wish I could lay my hands 

try and lose him. He is very dangerous. Quite apart from murder by night on 
his own account, he may put any enemy that is about on our track.' 

The night passed without Gollum showing so much as a shadow again. 





while the voyage lasted. If he was still following, he was very wary and 
cunning. At Aragorn’s bidding they paddled now for long spells, and the 
banks went swiftly by. But they saw little of the country, for they 

as the land allowed. In this way the time passed without event until the 


The weather was still grey and overcast, with wind from the East, but 
as evening drew into night the sky away westward cleared, and pools of faint 
light, yellow and pale green, opened under the grey shores of cloud. There 

Sam looked at it and puckered his brows. 


banks began to rise and grow stony. Soon they were passing through a hilly 
rocky land, and on both shores there were steep slopes buried in deep brakes 
of thorn and sloe, tangled with brambles and creepers. Behind them stood low 
crumbling cliffs, and chimneys of grey weathered stone dark with ivy; and 

They were drawing near to the grey hill -country of the Emyn Muil, the 


There were many birds about the cliffs and the rock-chimneys, and all 
day high in the air flocks of birds had been circling, black against the 
pale sky. As they lay in their camp that day Aragorn watched the flights 



their voyage was now moving in the wilderness. Later as the sun was setting, 
and the Company was stirring and getting ready to start again, he descried a 
dark spot against the fading light: a great bird high and far off, now 


’What is that, Legolas? ' he asked, pointing to the northern sky. 'Is 


’Yes.' said Legolas. 'It is an eagle, a hunting eagle. I wonder what 


'We will not start until it is fully dark,' said Aragorn. 

The eighth night of their journey came. It was silent and windless; the 

early into the pale sunset, but the sky was clear above, and though far away 
in the South there were great ranges of cloud that still shone faintly, in 






'Come! ' said Aragorn. 'We will venture one more journey by night. We 
are coming to reaches of the River that I do not know well: for I have never 
journeyed by water in these parts before, not between here and the rapids of 

ahead. Still there are dangerous places even before we come there: rocks and 
stony eyots in the stream. We must keep a sharp watch and not try to paddle 


To Sam in the leading boat was given the task of watchman. He lay 

were strangely bright, and there was a glimmer On the face of the River. It 
was close on midnight, and they had been drifting for some while, hardly 
using the paddles, when suddenly Sam cried out. Only a few yards ahead dark 

was a swift current which swung left, towards the eastern shore where the 
channel was clear. As they were swept aside the travellers could see, now 
very close, the pale foam of the River lashing against sharp rocks that were 

huddled together. 


leader. 'This is madness! We cannot dare the Rapids by night! But no boat 
can live in Sarn Gebir, be it night or day.’ 


paddle into the water, trying to hold the boat and bring it round. 

’I am out of my reckoning,’ he said to Frodo. ’I did not know that we 
had come so far: Anduin flows faster than I thought. Sarn Gebir must be 



about; but at first they could make only small headway against the current, 
and all the time they were carried nearer and nearer to the eastern bank. 




driven on the shoals.’ Even as he spoke Frodo felt the keel beneath him 


At that moment there was a twang of bowstrings: several arrows whistled 
over them, and some fell among them. One smote Frodo between the 





and he lurched forward with a cry, letting go his paddle: but the arrow fell 

hood; and a third stood fast in the gunwale of the second boat, close by 
Merry's hand. Sam thought he could glimpse black figures running to and fro 
upon the long shingle -banks that lay under the eastern shore. They seemed 






'Gollum's doing, I'll be bound.' said Sam to Frodo. 'And a nice place 
to choose, too. The River seems set on taking us right into their arms! ' 

They all leaned forward straining at the paddles: even Sam took a hand. 

whined overhead or struck the water nearby; but there were no more hits. It 
was dark, but not too dark for the night-eyes of Ores, and in the 
star-glimmer they must have offered their cunning foes some mark, unless it 

boats defeated the malice of the archers of Mordor. 

Stroke by stroke they laboured on. In the darkness it was hard to be 

grew less, and the shadow of the eastern bank faded back into the night. At 
last, as far as they could judge, they had reached the middle of the stream 
again and had driven their boats back some distance above the jutting rocks. 

western shore. Under the shadow Of bushes leaning out over the water they 


Legolas laid down his paddle and took up the bow that he had brought 
from Lurien. Then he sprang ashore and climbed a few paces up the bank. 
Stringing the bow and fitting an arrow he turned, peering back over the 

nothing could be seen. 


the night, seeking a mark to shoot at. His head was dark, crowned with sharp 
white stars that glittered in the black pools of the sky behind. But now 
rising and sailing up from the South the great clouds advanced, sending out 


' Elbereth Gilthoniel!' sighed Legolas as he looked up. Even as he did 
so, a dark shape, like a cloud and yet not a cloud, for it moved far more 




swiftly, came out of the blackness in the South, and sped towards the 

great winged creature, blacker than the pits in the night. Fierce voices 
rose up to greet it from across the water. Frodo felt a sudden chill running 
through him and clutching at his heart; there was a deadly cold, like the 


Suddenly the great bow of Lurien sang. Shrill went the arrow from the 
elven-string. Frodo looked up. Almost above him the winged shape swerved. 
There was a harsh croaking scream, as it fell out of the air, vanishing down 

tumult of many voices far away, cursing and wailing in the darkness, and 
then silence. Neither shaft nor cry came again from the east that night. 

After a while Aragorn led the boats back upstream. They felt their way 

bay. A few low trees grew there close to the water, and behind them rose a 
steep rocky bank. Here the Company decided to stay and await the dawn: it 
was useless to attempt to move further by night. They made no camp and lit 


’Praised be the bow of Galadriel, and the hand and eye of Legolas ! ’ 
said Gimli, as he munched a wafer of lembas. 'That was a mighty shot in the 




'I cannot,' said Gimli. 'But I am glad that the shadow came no nearer. 

I liked it not at all. Too much it reminded me of the shadow in Moria — the 


'It was not a Balrog,' said Frodo, still shivering with the chill that 
had come upon him. 'It was something colder. I think it was — ' Then he 


'What do you think? ' asked Boromir eagerly, leaning from his boat, as 


'I think — No, I will not say,' answered Frodo. 'Whatever it was, its 


'So it seems,' said Aragorn. 'Yet where they are, and how many, and 
what they will do next, we do not know. This night we must all be sleepless! 
Dark hides us now. But what the day will show who can tell? Have your 


Sam sat tapping the hilt of his sword as if he were counting on his 





Moon's the same in the Shire and in Wilderland, or it ought to be. But 
either it's out of its running, or I'm all wrong in my reckoning. You'll 
remember, Mr. Frodo, the Moon was waning as we lay on the flet up in that 

night, when up pops a New Moon as thin as a nail-paring, as if we had never 
stayed no time in the Elvish country. 


remember several more, but I would take my oath it was never a whole month. 
Anyone would think that time did not count in there! ’ 


we were in a time that has elsewhere long gone by. It was not, I think, 
until Silverlode bore us back to Anduin that we returned to the time that 
flows through mortal lands to the Great Sea. And I don't remember any moon, 


Legolas stirred in his boat. 'Nay, time does not tarry ever,' he said; 

'but change and growth is not in all things and places alike. For the Elves 
the world moves, and it moves both very swift and very slow. Swift, because 

them. Slow, because they do not count the running years, not for themselves. 
The passing seasons are but ripples ever repeated in the long long stream. 

Yet beneath the Sun all things must wear to an end at last.’ 


is on it. Rich are the hours, though short they seem, in Caras Galadhon, 


'That should not have been said outside Lurien, not even to me,' said 
Aragorn. 'Speak no more of it! But so it is, Sam: in that land you lost your 
count. There time flowed swiftly by us, as for the Elves. The old moon 

tarried there. And yestereve a new moon came again. Winter is nearly gone. 
Time flows on to a spring of little hope.’ 


water. The travellers huddled in their boats felt the changing of the 
weather. The air grew warm and very still under the great moist clouds that 
had floated up from the South and the distant seas. The rushing of the River 

the trees above them began to drip. 




When the day came the mood of the world about them had become soft and 

was mist on the River, and white fog swathed the shore; the far bank could 


'I can't abide fog,' said Sam; 'but this seems to be a lucky one. Now 
perhaps we can get away without those cursed goblins seeing us.' 


unless the fog lifts a little later on. And we must find the path, if we are 


'I do not see why we should pass the Rapids or follow the River any 
further,' said Boromir. 'If the Emyn Muil lie before us, then we can abandon 
these cockle-boats, and strike westward and southward, until we come to the 


'We can, if we are making for Minas Tirith,’ said Aragorn, 'but that is 
not yet agreed. And such a course may be more perilous than it sounds. The 

on foot and laden. I would not abandon our boats until we must. The River is 
at least a path that cannot be missed.' 


you pass the Gates of Argonath and come unmolested to the Tindrock, what 
will you do then? Leap down the Falls and land in the marshes? ’ 

'No! ' answered Aragorn. 'Say rather that we will bear our boats by the 

know, Boromir, or do you choose to forget the North Stair, and the high seat 
upon Amon Hen, that were made in the days of the great kings? I at least 
have a mind to stand in that high place again, before I decide my further 


Boromir held out long against this choice; but when it became plain 
that Frodo would follow Aragorn, wherever he went, he gave in. 'It is not 

said, 'and you will need my strength, if ever you are to reach the Tindrock. 

To the tall isle I will go, but no further. There I shall turn to my home, 
alone if my help has not earned the reward of any companionship.’ 


decided that Aragorn and Legolas should at once go forward along the shore, 
while the others remained by the boats. Aragorn hoped to find some way by 
which they could carry both their boats and their baggage to the smoother 






'Boats of the Elves would not sink, maybe,’ he said, 'but that does not 

yet. No road was made by the Men of Gondor in this region, for even in their 
great days their realm did not reach up Anduin beyond the Emyn Muil; but 
there is a portage-way somewhere on the western shore, if I can find it. It 

down to Osgiliath, and still did so until a few years ago, when the Ores of 



prowl on the east-shore,’ said Boromir. 'If you go forward, peril will grow 


'Peril lies ahead on every southward road,’ answered Aragorn. 'Wait for 
us one day. If we do not return in that time, you will know that evil has 
indeed befallen us. Then you must take a new leader and follow him as best 


It was with a heavy heart that Frodo saw Aragorn and Legolas climb the 

two or three hours had passed, and it was barely mid-day, when the shadowy 
shapes of the explorers appeared again. 


track, and it leads to a good landing that is still serviceable. The 
distance is not great: the head of the Rapids is but half a mile below us, 
and they are little more than a mile long. Not far beyond them the stream 

will be to get our boats and baggage to the old portage- way. We have found 
it, but it lies well back from the water-side here, and runs under the lee 
of a rock-wall, a furlong or more from the shore. We did not find where the 

yesterday night. We might labour far upstream and yet miss it in the fog. I 
fear we must leave the River now, and make for the portage-way as best we 


'That would not be easy, even if we were all Men,’ said Boromir. 



’Aye, we will,’ said Gimli. 'The legs of Men will lag on a rough road, 
while a Dwarf goes on, be the burden twice his own weight, Master Boromir! ’ 

The task proved hard indeed, yet in the end it was done. The goods were 





level space. Then the boats were drawn out of the water and carried up. They 
were far less heavy than any had expected. Of what tree growing in the 
elvish country they were made not even Legolas knew; but the wood was 



ease along the flat. Nonetheless it needed the strength of the two Men to 
lift and haul them over the ground that the Company now had to cross. It 
sloped up away from the River, a tumbled waste of grey limestone-boulders, 

of brambles, and sheer dells; and here and there boggy pools fed by waters 
trickling from the terraces further inland. 


toiled and scrambled after them with the baggage. At last all was removed 
and laid on the portage-way. Then with little further hindrance, save from 
sprawling briars and many fallen stones, they moved forward all together. 

shrouded the River: they could hear it rushing and foaming over the sharp 
shelves and stony teeth of Sarn Gebir, but they could not see it. Twice they 
made the journey, before all was brought safe to the southern landing. 


to the shallow edge of a little pool. It seemed to have been scooped in the 
river-side, not by hand, but by the water swirling down from Sarn Gebir 
against a low pier of rock that jutted out some way into the stream. Beyond 

for those on foot. 


in. They sat beside the water listening to the confused rush and roar of the 
Rapids hidden in the mist; they were tired and sleepy, and their hearts were 


'Well, here we are, and here we must pass another night,' said Boromir. 

'We need sleep, and even if Aragorn had a mind to pass the Gates of Argonath 


Gimli made no reply: he was nodding as he sat. 

'Let us rest as much as we can now,' said Aragorn. 'Tomorrow we must 

shall have a good chance of slipping through, unseen by any eyes on the 




eastern shore. But tonight two must watch together in turns: three hours off 


Nothing happened that night worse than a brief drizzle of rain an hour 
before dawn. As soon as it was fully light they started. Already the fog was 

could see the dim shapes of the low cliffs rising ever higher, shadowy walls 
with their feet in the hurrying river. In the mid-morning the clouds drew 
down lower, and it began to rain heavily. They drew the skin -covers over 

be seen before them or about them through the grey falling curtains. 

The rain, however, did not last long. Slowly the sky above grew 
lighter, and then suddenly the clouds broke, and their draggled fringes 

the travellers lay a wide ravine, with great rocky sides to which clung, 
upon shelves and in narrow crevices, a few thrawn trees. The channel grew 

hope of stopping or turning, whatever they might meet ahead. Over them was a 
lane of pale-blue sky, around them the dark overshadowed River, and before 
them black, shutting out the sun, the hills of Emyn Muil, in which no 


Frodo peering forward saw in the distance two great rocks approaching: 

ominous they stood upon either side of the stream. A narrow gap appeared 
between them, and the River swept the boats towards it. 


shall pass them soon. Keep the boats in line, and as far apart as you can! 

Hold the middle of the stream! ’ 


meet him. Giants they seemed to him, vast grey figures silent but 
threatening. Then he saw that they were indeed shaped and fashioned: the 

through the suns and rains of forgotten years the mighty likenesses in which 
they had been hewn. Upon great pedestals founded in the deep waters stood 
two great kings of stone: still with blurred eyes and crannied brows they 

gesture of warning; in each right hand there was an axe; upon each head 
there was a crumbling helm and crown. Great power and majesty they still 




wore, the silent wardens of a long -vanished kingdom. Awe and fear fell upon 
Frodo, and he cowered down, shutting his eyes and not daring to look up as 

frail and fleeting as little leaves, under the enduring shadow of the 
sentinels of N®menor. So they passed into the dark chasm of the Gates. 


off was the dim sky. The black waters roared and echoed, and a wind screamed 
over them. Frodo crouching over his knees heard Sam in front muttering and 
groaning: 'What a place! What a horrible place! Just let me get out of this 



Strider, and yet not Strider; for the weatherworn Ranger was no longer 
there. In the stern sat Aragorn son of Arathorn, proud and erect, guiding 

blowing in the wind, a light was in his eyes: a king returning from exile to 


’Fear not! ' he said. 'Long have I desired to look upon the likenesses 
of Isildur and Anbrion, my sires of old. Under their shadow Elessar, the 
Elfstone son of Arathorn of the House of Valandil Isildur’s son heir of 


Then the light of his eyes faded, and he spoke to himself: 'Would that 

own city! But whither now shall I go? ’ 

The chasm was long and dark, and filled with the noise of wind and 

at first all was dark ahead; but soon Frodo saw a tall gap of light before 
him, ever growing. Swiftly it drew near, and suddenly the boats shot 


The sun, already long fallen from the noon, was shining in a windy sky. 

The pent waters spread out into a long oval lake, pale Nen Hithoel, fenced 

bare, cold-gleaming in the sunlight. At the far southern end rose three 
peaks. The midmost stood somewhat forward from the others and sundered 


them, an island in the waters, about which the flowing River flung pale 

like the roll of thunder heard far away. 




'Behold Tol Brandir! ' said Aragorn, pointing south to the tall peak. 


Hearing and of Sight. In the days of the great kings there were high seats 
upon them, and watch was kept there. But it is said that no foot of man or 
beast has ever been set upon Tol Brandir. Ere the shade of night falls we 


The Company rested now for a while, drifting south on the current that 
flowed through the middle of the lake. They ate some food, and then they 
took to their paddles and hastened on their way. The sides of the westward 

misty star peered out. The three peaks loomed before them, darkling in the 
twilight. Rauros was roaring with a great voice. Already night was laid on 
the flowing waters when the travellers came at last under the shadow of the 



They could go no further without choice between the east-way and the west. 
The last stage of the Quest was before them. 








Aragorn led them to the right arm of the River. Here upon its western 
side under the shadow of Tol Brandir a green lawn ran down to the water from 

clad with trees, and trees marched away westward along the curving shores of 
the lake. A little spring fell tumbling down and fed the grass. 


Galen: a fair place in the summer days of old. Let us hope that no evil has 


They drew up their boats on the green banks, and beside them they made 
their camp. They set a watch, but had no sight nor sound of their enemies. 

If Gollum had contrived to follow them, he remained unseen and unheard. 

sleep and waking. In the small hours he got up and came to Frodo, whose turn 


'Why are you waking? ' asked Frodo. 'It is not your watch.' 

'I do not know,’ answered Aragorn; 'but a shadow and a threat has been 


'Why? ’ said Frodo. 'Are enemies at hand? ’ 



Frodo then drew the elf-blade from its sheath. To his dismay the edges 
gleamed dimly in the night. 'Ores! ’ he said. 'Not very near, and yet too 


'I feared as much,' said Aragorn. 'But maybe they are not on this side 
of the River. The light of Sting is faint, and it may point to no more than 

before of Ores upon Amon Hen. Yet who knows what may happen in these 


days, now that Minas Tirith no longer holds secure the passages of Anduin. 


The day came like fire and smoke. Low in the East there were black bars 
of cloud like the fumes of a great burning. The rising sun lit them from 

clear sky. The summit of Tol Brandir was tipped with gold. Frodo looked out 




eastward and gazed at the tall island. Its sides sprang sheer out of the 
running water. High up above the tall cliffs were steep slopes upon which 

grey faces of inaccessible rock, crowned by a great spire of stone. Many 
birds were circling about it, but no sign of other living things could be 


When they had eaten, Aragorn called the Company together. 'The day has 

shall now become of our Company that has travelled so far in fellowship? 
Shall we turn west with Boromir and go to the wars of Gondor; or turn east 
to the Fear and Shadow; or shall we break our fellowship and go this way and 

long 


Ores may already be on this side of the water.' 



'Well, Frodo,' said Aragorn at last. 'I fear that the burden is laid 
upon you. You are the Bearer appointed by the Council. Your own way you 
alone can choose. In this matter I cannot advise you. I am not Gandalf, and 

had for this hour, if indeed he had any. Most likely it seems that if he 
were here now the choice would still wait on you. Such is your fate.' 

Frodo did not answer at once. Then he spoke slowly. 'I know that haste 

and I will speak. Let me be alone! ’ 


Drogo,' he said. 'You shall have an hour, and you shall be alone. We will 
stay here for a while. But do not stray far or out of call.’ 


his master with great concern, shook his head and muttered: 'Plain as a 
pikestaff it is, but it's no good Sam Gamgee putting in his spoke just now.' 

Presently Frodo got up and walked away; and Sam saw that while the 

followed Frodo intently, until he passed out of sight in the trees at the 


Wandering aimlessly at first in the wood, Frodo found that his feet 




were leading him up towards the slopes of the hill. He came to a path, the 
dwindling ruins of a road of long ago. In steep places stairs of stone had 

trees. For some while he climbed, not caring which way he went, until he 
came to a grassy place. Rowan-trees grew about it, and in the midst was a 
wide flat stone. The little upland lawn was open upon the East and was 

River, far below him, to Tol Brandir and the birds wheeling in the great 
gulf of air between him and the untrodden isle. The voice of Rauros was a 


He sat down upon the stone and cupped his chin in his hands, staring 
eastwards but seeing little with his eyes. All that had happened since Bilbo 
left the Shire was passing through his mind, and he recalled and pondered 

still he was no nearer to a choice. 


something was behind him, that unfriendly eyes were upon him. He sprang up 
and turned; but all that he saw to his surprise was Boromir, and his face 


'I was afraid for you, Frodo,' he said, coming forward. 'If Aragorn is 
right and Ores are near, then none of us should wander alone, and you least 

and talk for a while, since I have found you? It would comfort me. Where 
there are so many, all speech becomes a debate without end. But two together 


'You are kind,' answered Frodo. 'But I do not think that any speech 
will help me. For I know what I should do, but I am afraid of doing it, 


Boromir stood silent. Rauros roared endlessly on. The wind murmured in 


Suddenly Boromir came and sat beside him. 'Are you sure that you do not 
suffer needlessly? ’ he said. 'I wish to help you. You need counsel in your 


’I think I know already what counsel you would give, Boromir,' said 


'Warning? Warning against what? ' said Boromir sharply. 

'Against delay. Against the way that seems easier. Against refusal of 





trust in the strength and truth of Men.' 

'Yet that strength has long protected you far away in your little 


'I do not doubt the valour of your people. But the world is changing. 


they fail, what then? ' 


will not fail.' 



'Ah! The Ring! ' said Boromir, his eyes lighting. 'The Ring! Is it not 
a strange fate that we should suffer so much fear and doubt for so small a 

of Elrond. Could I not have a sight of it again? ' 

Frodo looked up. His heart went suddenly cold. He caught the strange 

best that it should lie hidden,' he answered. 


it? For you seem ever to think only of its power in the hands of the Enemy: 
of its evil uses not of its good. The world is changing, you say. Minas 
Tirith will fall, if the Ring lasts. But why? Certainly, if the Ring were 


'Were you not at the Council? ' answered Frodo. 'Because we cannot use 


Boromir got up and walked about impatiently. 'So you go on,' he cried. 
'Gandalf, Elrond — all these folk have taught you to say so. For themselves 
they may be right. These elves and half-elves and wizards, they would come 


But each to his own kind. True-hearted Men, they will not be corrupted. We 
of Minas Tirith have been staunch through long years of trial. We do not 
desire the power of wizard-lords, only strength to defend ourselves, 

-Ring of Power. It is a gift, I say; a gift to the foes of Mordor. It is mad 
not to use it, to use the power of the Enemy against him. The fearless, the 
ruthless, these alone will achieve victory. What could not a warrior do in 
this hour, a great leader? What could not Aragorn do? Or if he refuses, why 







hosts of Mordor, and all men would flock to my banner!' 

Boromir strode up and down, speaking ever more loudly: Almost he seemed 

mustering of men; and he drew plans for great alliances and glorious 
victories to be; and he cast down Mordor, and became himself a mighty king, 
benevolent and wise. Suddenly he stopped and waved his arms. 


it. That might be well, if reason could show any hope of doing so. It does 
not. The only plan that is proposed to us is that a halfling should walk 
blindly into Mordor and offer the Enemy every chance of recapturing it for 



again. 'You say that you are afraid. If it is so, the boldest should pardon 
you. But is it not really your good sense that revolts?' 


heard you speak so fully. My mind is clearer now.' 

'Then you will come to Minas Tirith? ' cried Boromir. His eyes were 




'But you will come, at least for a while? ' Boromir persisted. 'My city 
is not far now; and it is little further from there to Mordor than from 
here. We have been long in the wilderness, and you need news of what the 



need rest before your venture, if go you must.’ He laid his hand on the 
hobbit's shoulder in friendly fashion; but Frodo felt the hand trembling 
with suppressed excitement. He stepped quickly away, and eyed with alarm the 


'Why are you so unfriendly? ’ said Boromir. 'I am a true man, neither 
thief nor tracker. I need your Ring: that you know now; but I give you my 
word that I do not desire to keep it. Will you not at least let me make 


'No! no! ' cried Frodo. 'The Council laid it upon me to bear it.' 



'How it angers me! Fool! Obstinate fool! Running wilfully to death and 




mining our cause. If any mortals have claim to the Ring, it is the men of 
N®menor, and not Halflings. It is not yours save by unhappy chance. It might 


Frodo did not answer, but moved away till the great flat stone stood 
between them. 'Come, come, my friend! ' said Boromir in a softer voice. 'Why 
not get rid of it? Why not be free of your doubt and fear? You can lay the 

force. For I am too strong for you, halfling,' he cried; and suddenly he 
sprang over the stone and leaped at Frodo. His fair and pleasant face was 


Frodo dodged aside and again put the stone between them. There was only 
one thing he could do: trembling he pulled out the Ring upon its chain and 
quickly slipped it on his finger, even as Boromir sprang at him again. The 

here and there among the rocks and trees. 


see your mind. You will take the Ring to Sauron and sell us all. You have 
only waited your chance to leave us in the lurch. Curse you and all 
halflings to death and darkness ! ' Then, catching his foot on a stone, he 

own curse had struck him down; then suddenly he wept. 

He rose and passed his hand over his eyes, dashing away the tears. 


'Come back! A madness took me, but it has passed. Come back! ' 

There was no answer. Frodo did not even hear his cries. He was already 
far away, leaping blindly up the path to the hill-top. Terror and grief 



Soon he came out alone on the summit of Amon Hen, and halted, gasping 
for breath. He saw as through a mist a wide flat circle, paved with mighty 
flags, and surrounded with a crumbling battlement; and in the middle, set 


Up he went and sat upon the ancient chair, feeling like a lost child that 
had clambered upon the throne of mountain -kings. 


which there were only shadows: the Ring was upon him. Then here and there 
the mist gave way and he saw many visions: small and clear as if they were 




under his eyes upon a table, and yet remote. There was no sound, only bright 

sitting upon the Seat of Seeing, on Amon Hen, the Hill of the Eye of the Men 
of N®menor. Eastward he looked into wide uncharted lands, nameless plains, 
and forests unexplored. Northward he looked, and the Great River lay like a 
ribbon beneath him, and the Misty Mountains stood small and hard as broken 

the pinnacle of Isengard, like a black spike. Southward he looked, and below 
his very feet the Great River curled like a toppling wave and plunged over 
the falls of Rauros into a foaming pit; a glimmering rainbow played upon the 

sea-birds whirling like a white dust in the sun, and beneath them a green 
and silver sea, rippling in endless lines. 


were crawling like anthills: ores were issuing out of a thousand holes. 

Under the boughs of Mirkwood there was deadly strife of Elves and Men and 
fell beasts. The land of the Beornings was aflame; a cloud was over Moria; 


Horsemen were galloping on the grass of Rohan; wolves poured from 

the East Men were moving endlessly: swordsmen, spearmen, bowmen upon 


chariots of chieftains and laden wains. All the power of the Dark Lord was 
in motion. Then turning south again he beheld Minas Tirith. Far away it 

mountain- seat; its battlements glittered with steel, and its turrets were 
bright with many banners. Hope leaped in his heart. But against Minas Tirith 
was set another fortress, greater and more strong. Thither, eastward, 
unwilling his eye was drawn. It passed the ruined bridges of Osgiliath, the 

upon Gorgoroth, the valley of terror in the Land of Mordor. Darkness lay 
there under the Sun. Fire glowed amid the smoke. Mount Doom was burning, 



battlement upon battlement, black, immeasurably strong, mountain of iron, 
gate of steel, tower of adamant, he saw it: Barad-dyr, Fortress of Sauron. 






And suddenly he felt the Eye. There was an eye in the Dark Tower that 
did not sleep. He knew that it had become aware of his gaze. A fierce eager 

searching for him. Very soon it would nail him down, know just exactly where 
he was. Amon Lhaw it touched. It glanced upon Tol Brandir he threw himself 
from the seat, crouching, covering his head with his grey hood. 


come to you ? He could not tell. Then as a flash from some other point of 
power there came to his mind another thought: Take it off! Take it off! 



The two powers strove in him. For a moment, perfectly balanced between 
their piercing points, he writhed, tormented. Suddenly he was aware of 

with one remaining instant in which to do so. He took the Ring off his 
finger. He was kneeling in clear sunlight before the high seat. A black 
shadow seemed to pass like an arm above him; it missed Amon Hen and 



every tree. 


firm and his heart lighter. He spoke aloud to himself. T will do now what I 
must,' he said. This at least is plain: the evil of the Ring is already at 
work even in the Company, and the Ring must leave them before it does more 

dear to me: poor old Sam, and Merry and Pippin. Strider, too: his heart 
yearns for Minas Tirith, and he will be needed there, now Boromir has fallen 


He went quickly down the path and came back to the lawn where Boromir 
had found him. Then he halted, listening. He thought he could hear cries and 


'They'll be hunting for me,' he said. T wonder how long I have been 
away. Hours, I should think.' He hesitated. 'What can I do? ' he muttered. 


leaving them, and like this without any explanation. But surely they will 
understand. Sam will. And what else can I do?' 


passed down the hill, less than a rustle of the wind. 




The others remained long by the river -side. For some time they had been 

they were talking. Every now and again they made efforts to speak of other 
things, of their long road and many adventures; they questioned Aragorn 
concerning the realm of Gondor and its ancient history, and the remnants of 

Emyn Muil: the stone kings and the seats of Lhaw and Hen, and the great 
Stair beside the falls of Rauros. But always their thoughts and words 
strayed back to Frodo and the Ring. What would Frodo choose to do? Why 




'He is debating which course is the most desperate, I think,’ said 

to go east, since we have been tracked by Gollum, and must fear that the 
secret of our journey is already betrayed. But Minas Tirith is no nearer to 


'We may remain there for a while and make a brave stand; but the Lord 
Denethor and all his men cannot hope to do what even Elrond said was beyond 
his power: either to keep the Burden secret, or to hold off the full might 

Frodo’s place? I do not know. Now indeed we miss Gandalf most.’ 

’Grievous is our loss,’ said Legolas. ’Yet we must needs make up our 
minds without his aid. Why cannot we decide, and so help Frodo? Let us call 


'And so should I,’ said Gimli. ’We, of course, were only sent to help 
the Bearer along the road, to go no further than we wished; and none of us 



Lothlurien. Yet I have come so far, and I say this: now we have reached the 
last choice, it is clear to me that I cannot leave Frodo. I would choose 





’It would indeed be a betrayal, if we all left him,’ said Aragorn. ’But 
if he goes east, then all need not go with him; nor do I think that all 
should. That venture is desperate: as much so for eight as for three or two, 






Boromir will return to his own city, where his father and his people need 
him; and with him the others should go, or at least Meriadoc and Peregrin, 


'That won’t do at all! ' cried Merry. 'We can't leave Frodo! Pippin and 
I always intended to go wherever he went, and we still do. But we did not 

or in Ri vendell. It would be mad and cruel to let Frodo go to Mordor. Why 


'We must stop him,' said Pippin. 'And that is what he is worrying 
about, I am sure. He knows we shan't agree to his going east. And he doesn't 
like to ask anyone to go with him, poor old fellow. Imagine it: going off to 

to know that he hasn't got to ask. He ought to know that if we can't stop 


'Begging your pardon,' said Sam. 'I don't think you understand my 
master at all. He isn't hesitating about which way to go. Of course not! 
What's the good of Minas Tirith anyway? To him, I mean, begging your 



Boromir, who at first had been sitting silent on the outside of the circle, 


'Now where's he got to? ' cried Sam, looking worried. 'He's been a bit 
queer lately, to my mind. But anyway he's not in this business. He's off to 
his home, as he always said; and no blame to him. But Mr. Frodo, he knows 

come to the point, he's just plain terrified. That's what his trouble is. Of 
course he's had a bit of schooling, so to speak-we all have-since we left 
home, or he'd be so terrified he'd just fling the Ring in the River and 

either: whether we'll go along with him or no. He knows we mean to. That's 
another thing that's bothering him. If he screws himself up to go, he'll 
want to go alone. Mark my words! We're going to have trouble when he 


back. For he'll screw himself up all right, as sure as his name's Baggins.' 


'And what shall we do, if you prove right? ’ 






'I wonder? ' said Aragorn. 'He is the Bearer, and the fate of the 
Burden is on him. I do not think that it is our part to drive him one way or 

other powers at work far stronger.' 

'Well, I wish Frodo would "screw himself up" and come back, and let us 




'Yes,' said Aragorn. 'The hour is long passed. The morning is wearing 


At that moment Boromir reappeared. He came out from the trees and 
walked towards them without speaking. His face looked grim and sad. He 
paused as if counting those that were present, and then sat down aloof, with 


'Where have you been, Boromir? ’ asked Aragorn. 'Have you seen Frodo? ’ 



'Yes: I found him some way up the hill, and I spoke to him. I urged him to 
come to Minas Tirith and not to go east. I grew angry and he left me. He 
vanished. I have never seen such a thing happen before, though I have heard 

thought he would return to you.' 


too kindly at Boromir. 



'This is bad!' cried Sam, jumping up. 'I don't know what this Man has 
been up to. Why should Mr. Frodo put the thing on? He didn't ought to have; 


'But he wouldn't keep it on' 1 said Merry. 'Not when he had escaped the 


'But where did he go? Where is he? ' cried Pippin. 'He's been away ages 


'How long is it since you saw Frodo last, Boromir? ' asked Aragorn. 

'Half an hour, maybe,' he answered. 'Or it might be an hour. I have 

head in his hands, and sat as if bowed with grief. 

'An hour since he vanished! ' shouted Sam. 'We must try and find him at 






arrange-here, hold on! Wait! ' 

It was no good. They took no notice of him. Sam had dashed off first. 

the trees by the shore, shouting: Frodo! Frodo ! in their clear, high 
hobbit- voices. Legolas and Gimli were running. A sudden panic or madness 


'We shall all be scattered and lost,’ groaned Aragorn. 'Boromir! I do 
not know what part you have played in this mischief, but help now! Go after 

find Frodo. Come back to this spot, if you find him, or any traces of him. I 


Aragorn sprang swiftly away and went in pursuit of Sam. Just as he 
reached the little lawn among the rowans he overtook him, toiling uphill, 


'Come with me, Sam! ’ he said. 'None of us should be alone. There is 
mischief about. I feel it. I am going to the top, to the Seat of Amon Hen, 

this way. Follow me, and keep your eyes open! ' He sped up the path. 

Sam did his best, but he could not keep up with Strider the Ranger, and 
soon fell behind. He had not gone far before Aragorn was out of sight ahead. 


'Whoa, Sam Gamgee! ’ he said aloud. 'Your legs are too short, so use 
your head! Let me see now! Boromir isn't lying, that's not his way; but he 

himself up to the point, sudden. He made up his mind at last to go. Where 
to? Off East. Not without Sam? Yes, without even his Sam. That's hard, cruel 


Sam passed his hand over his eyes, brushing away the tears. 'Steady, 
Gamgee! ' he said. 'Think, if you can! He can't fly across rivers, and he 

boats. Back to the boats! Back to the boats, Sam, like lightning! ' 

Sam turned and bolted back down the path. He fell and cut his knees. Up 

shore, where the boats were drawn up out of the water. No one was there. 
There seemed to be cries in the woods behind, but he did not heed them. He 
stood gazing for a moment, stock-still, gaping. A boat was sliding down the 





slipped into the wat 









'Coming, Mr. Frodo! Coming! ' called Sam, and flung himself from the 

and a splash he fell face downward into deep swift water. Gurgling he went 
under, and the River closed over his curly head. 


the boat put about. Frodo was just in time to grasp Sam by the hair as he 
came up, bubbling and struggling. Fear was staring in his round brown eyes. 



'Save me, Mr. Frodo! ’ gasped Sam. 'I'm drownded. I can’t see your 


'Here it is. Don't pinch, lad! I won’t let you go. Tread water and 
don’t flounder, or you'll upset the boat. There now, get hold of the side, 


With a few strokes Frodo brought the boat back to the bank, and Sam was 
able to scramble out, wet as a water-rat. Frodo took off the Ring and 




’Oh, Mr. Frodo, that’s hard! ’ said Sam shivering. 'That’s hard, trying 
to go without me and all. If I hadn’t a guessed right, where would you be 




'Safely! ’ said Sam. 'All alone and without me to help you? I couldn’t 
have a borne it, it’d have been the death of me.’ 


could not have borne that.’ 



'But I am going to Mordor.’ 


with you.’ 


back at any minute. If they catch me here. I shall have to argue and 




explain, and I shall never have the heart or the chance to get off. But I 


'Of course it is,' answered Sam. 'But not alone. I'm coming too, or 
neither of us isn’t going. I'll knock holes in all the boats first.' 


'Leave one! 'he said. 'We'll need it. But you can't come like this without 


'Just hold on a moment, and I'll get my stuff!' cried Sam eagerly. 

'It's all ready. I thought we should be off today.' He rushed to the camping 
place, fished out his pack from the pile where Frodo had laid it when he 

extra packages of food, and ran back. 

'So all my plan is spoilt! ’ said Frodo. 'It is no good trying to 

plain that we were meant to go together. We will go, and may the others find 
a safe road! Strider will look after them. I don't suppose we shall see them 




So Frodo and Sam set off on the last stage of the Quest together. Frodo 
paddled away from the shore, and the River bore them swiftly away, down the 
western arm, and past the frowning cliffs of Tol Brandir. The roar of the 

work to pass across the current at the southward end of the island and drive 
the boat eastward towards the far shore. 


Lhaw. There they found a shelving shore, and they drew the boat out, high 
above the water, and hid it as well as they could behind a great boulder. 

Then shouldering their burdens, they set off, seeking a path that would 






Here ends the first part of the history of the War of the Ring. 

The second part is called THE TWO TOWERS, since the events recounted 
in it are dominated by ORTHANC, the citadel of Saruman, and the fortress 

the deeds and perils of all the members of the now sundered fellowship, until 


The third part tells of the last defence against the Shadow, and the 
end of the mission of the Ring-bearer in THE RETURN OF THE KING. 




