DRACULA











_3 May. Bistritz._--Left Munich at 8:35 P. M., on 1st May, arriving at
Vienna early next morning; should have arrived at 6:46, but train was an

got of it from the train and the little I could walk through the
streets. I feared to go very far from the station, as we had arrived

impression I had was that we were leaving the West and entering the
East; the most western of splendid bridges over the Danube, which is

rule.


Here I stopped for the night at the Hotel Royale. I had for dinner, or
rather supper, a chicken done up some way with red pepper, which was

waiter, and he said it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was a
national dish, I should be able to get it anywhere along the

don't know how I should be able to get on without it.

Having had some time at my disposal when in London, I had visited the

regarding Transylvania; it had struck me that some foreknowledge of the
country could hardly fail to have some importance in dealing with a

extreme east of the country, just on the borders of three states,
Transylvania, Moldavia and Bukovina, in the midst of the Carpathian

not able to light on any map or work giving the exact locality of the
Castle Dracula, as there are no maps of this country as yet to compare
with our own Ordnance Survey maps; but I found that Bistritz, the post

here some of my notes, as they may refresh my memory when I talk over my


In the population of Transylvania there are four distinct nationalities:
Saxons in the South, and mixed with them the Wallachs, who are the

East and North. I am going among the latter, who claim to be descended
from Attila and the Huns. This may be so, for when the Magyars conquered
the country in the eleventh century they found the Huns settled in it. I

horseshoe of the Carpathians, as if it were the centre of some sort of
imaginative whirlpool; if so my stay may be very interesting. (_Mem._, I


I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had

window, which may have had something to do with it; or it may have been
the paprika, for I had to drink up all the water in my carafe, and was
still thirsty. Towards morning I slept and was wakened by the continuous

I had for breakfast more paprika, and a sort of porridge of maize flour
which they said was "mamaliga," and egg-plant stuffed with forcemeat, a

for this also.) I had to hurry breakfast, for the train started a little
before eight, or rather it ought to have done so, for after rushing to
the station at 7:30 I had to sit in the carriage for more than an hour

more unpunctual are the trains. What ought they to be in China?

All day long we seemed to dawdle through a country which was full of

top of steep hills such as we see in old missals; sometimes we ran by
rivers and streams which seemed from the wide stony margin on each side

running strong, to sweep the outside edge of a river clear. At every
station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all sorts
of attire. Some of them were just like the peasants at home or those I

and home-made trousers; but others were very picturesque. The women
looked pretty, except when you got near them, but they were very clumsy

and most of them had big belts with a lot of strips of something
fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course there

Slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy
hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous
heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass

had long black hair and heavy black moustaches. They are very
picturesque, but do not look prepossessing. On the stage they would be

however, I am told, very harmless and rather wanting in natural


It was on the dark side of twilight when we got to Bistritz, which is a
very interesting old place. Being practically on the frontier--for the

existence, and it certainly shows marks of it. Fifty years ago a series
of great fires took place, which made terrible havoc on five separate

a siege of three weeks and lost 13,000 people, the casualties of war


Count Dracula had directed me to go to the Golden Krone Hotel, which I
found, to my great delight, to be thoroughly old-fashioned, for of
course I wanted to see all I could of the ways of the country. I was

cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual peasant dress--white

fitting almost too tight for modesty. When I came close she bowed and
said, "The Herr Englishman?" "Yes," I said, "Jonathan Harker." She
smiled, and gave some message to an elderly man in white shirt-sleeves,



     "My Friend.--Welcome to the Carpathians. I am anxiously expecting
     you. Sleep well to-night. At three to-morrow the diligence will
     start for Bukovina; a place on it is kept for you. At the Borgo

     that your journey from London has been a happy one, and that you


"Your friend,





directing him to secure the best place on the coach for me; but on
making inquiries as to details he seemed somewhat reticent, and

true, because up to then he had understood it perfectly; at least, he
answered my questions exactly as if he did. He and his wife, the old

way. He mumbled out that the money had been sent in a letter, and that
was all he knew. When I asked him if he knew Count Dracula, and could
tell me anything of his castle, both he and his wife crossed themselves,

further. It was so near the time of starting that I had no time to ask
any one else, for it was all very mysterious and not by any means


Just before I was leaving, the old lady came up to my room and said in a



state that she seemed to have lost her grip of what German she knew, and
mixed it all up with some other language which I did not know at all. I
was just able to follow her by asking many questions. When I told her



"Do you know what day it is?" I answered that it was the fourth of May.
She shook her head as she said again:


my saying that I did not understand, she went on:

"It is the eve of St. George's Day. Do you not know that to-night, when

full sway? Do you know where you are going, and what you are going to?"
She was in such evident distress that I tried to comfort her, but

to go; at least to wait a day or two before starting. It was all very
ridiculous but I did not feel comfortable. However, there was business

tried to raise her up, and said, as gravely as I could, that I thanked
her, but my duty was imperative, and that I must go. She then rose and
dried her eyes, and taking a crucifix from her neck offered it to me. I

taught to regard such things as in some measure idolatrous, and yet it
seemed so ungracious to refuse an old lady meaning so well and in such a

rosary round my neck, and said, "For your mother's sake," and went out
of the room. I am writing up this part of the diary whilst I am waiting
for the coach, which is, of course, late; and the crucifix is still

traditions of this place, or the crucifix itself, I do not know, but I
am not feeling nearly as easy in my mind as usual. If this book should



       *       *       *       *       *

_5 May. The Castle._--The grey of the morning has passed, and the sun is

hills I know not, for it is so far off that big things and little are
mixed. I am not sleepy, and, as I am not to be called till I awake,

down, and, lest who reads them may fancy that I dined too well before I
left Bistritz, let me put down my dinner exactly. I dined on what they
called "robber steak"--bits of bacon, onion, and beef, seasoned with red

style of the London cat's meat! The wine was Golden Mediasch, which
produces a queer sting on the tongue, which is, however, not


When I got on the coach the driver had not taken his seat, and I saw him
talking with the landlady. They were evidently talking of me, for every

on the bench outside the door--which they call by a name meaning
"word-bearer"--came and listened, and then looked at me, most of them
pityingly. I could hear a lot of words often repeated, queer words, for

dictionary from my bag and looked them out. I must say they were not
cheering to me, for amongst them were "Ordog"--Satan, "pokol"--hell,

thing, one being Slovak and the other Servian for something that is
either were-wolf or vampire. (_Mem._, I must ask the Count about these


When we started, the crowd round the inn door, which had by this time

pointed two fingers towards me. With some difficulty I got a
fellow-passenger to tell me what they meant; he would not answer at

charm or guard against the evil eye. This was not very pleasant for me,
just starting for an unknown place to meet an unknown man; but every one

could not but be touched. I shall never forget the last glimpse which I
had of the inn-yard and its crowd of picturesque figures, all crossing
themselves, as they stood round the wide archway, with its background of

centre of the yard. Then our driver, whose wide linen drawers covered
the whole front of the box-seat--"gotza" they call them--cracked his big

our journey.


scene as we drove along, although had I known the language, or rather
languages, which my fellow-passengers were speaking, I might not have

land full of forests and woods, with here and there steep hills, crowned
with clumps of trees or with farmhouses, the blank gable end to the
road. There was everywhere a bewildering mass of fruit blossom--apple,

the trees spangled with the fallen petals. In and out amongst these
green hills of what they call here the "Mittel Land" ran the road,

straggling ends of pine woods, which here and there ran down the
hillsides like tongues of flame. The road was rugged, but still we

what the haste meant, but the driver was evidently bent on losing no
time in reaching Borgo Prund. I was told that this road is in summertime

snows. In this respect it is different from the general run of roads in
the Carpathians, for it is an old tradition that they are not to be kept
in too good order. Of old the Hospadars would not repair them, lest the

and so hasten the war which was always really at loading point.

Beyond the green swelling hills of the Mittel Land rose mighty slopes

and left of us they towered, with the afternoon sun falling full upon
them and bringing out all the glorious colours of this beautiful range,
deep blue and purple in the shadows of the peaks, green and brown where

pointed crags, till these were themselves lost in the distance, where
the snowy peaks rose grandly. Here and there seemed mighty rifts in the

the white gleam of falling water. One of my companions touched my arm as
we swept round the base of a hill and opened up the lofty, snow-covered
peak of a mountain, which seemed, as we wound on our serpentine way, to


"Look! Isten szek!"--"God's seat!"--and he crossed himself reverently.


us, the shadows of the evening began to creep round us. This was
emphasised by the fact that the snowy mountain-top still held the

we passed Cszeks and Slovaks, all in picturesque attire, but I noticed
that goitre was painfully prevalent. By the roadside were many crosses,

was a peasant man or woman kneeling before a shrine, who did not even
turn round as we approached, but seemed in the self-surrender of
devotion to have neither eyes nor ears for the outer world. There were

and there very beautiful masses of weeping birch, their white stems
shining like silver through the delicate green of the leaves. Now and

long, snake-like vertebra, calculated to suit the inequalities of the
road. On this were sure to be seated quite a group of home-coming

coloured, sheepskins, the latter carrying lance-fashion their long
staves, with axe at end. As the evening fell it began to get very cold,

gloom of the trees, oak, beech, and pine, though in the valleys which
ran deep between the spurs of the hills, as we ascended through the

late-lying snow. Sometimes, as the road was cut through the pine woods
that seemed in the darkness to be closing down upon us, great masses of
greyness, which here and there bestrewed the trees, produced a

grim fancies engendered earlier in the evening, when the falling sunset
threw into strange relief the ghost-like clouds which amongst the

hills were so steep that, despite our driver's haste, the horses could
only go slowly. I wished to get down and walk up them, as we do at home,

walk here; the dogs are too fierce"; and then he added, with what he
evidently meant for grim pleasantry--for he looked round to catch the
approving smile of the rest--"and you may have enough of such matters

pause to light his lamps.


passengers, and they kept speaking to him, one after the other, as
though urging him to further speed. He lashed the horses unmercifully

to further exertions. Then through the darkness I could see a sort of
patch of grey light ahead of us, as though there were a cleft in the

rocked on its great leather springs, and swayed like a boat tossed on a
stormy sea. I had to hold on. The road grew more level, and we appeared

side and to frown down upon us; we were entering on the Borgo Pass. One
by one several of the passengers offered me gifts, which they pressed
upon me with an earnestness which would take no denial; these were

faith, with a kindly word, and a blessing, and that strange mixture of
fear-meaning movements which I had seen outside the hotel at

Then, as we flew along, the driver leaned forward, and on each side the
passengers, craning over the edge of the coach, peered eagerly into the

happening or expected, but though I asked each passenger, no one would
give me the slightest explanation. This state of excitement kept on for
some little time; and at last we saw before us the Pass opening out on

air the heavy, oppressive sense of thunder. It seemed as though the
mountain range had separated two atmospheres, and that now we had got

which was to take me to the Count. Each moment I expected to see the
glare of lamps through the blackness; but all was dark. The only light

hard-driven horses rose in a white cloud. We could see now the sandy
road lying white before us, but there was on it no sign of a vehicle.
The passengers drew back with a sigh of gladness, which seemed to mock

the driver, looking at his watch, said to the others something which I
could hardly hear, it was spoken so quietly and in so low a tone; I

in German worse than my own:--


now come on to Bukovina, and return to-morrow or the next day; better
the next day." Whilst he was speaking the horses began to neigh and

amongst a chorus of screams from the peasants and a universal crossing
of themselves, a calèche, with four horses, drove up behind us, overtook
us, and drew up beside the coach. I could see from the flash of our

splendid animals. They were driven by a tall man, with a long brown
beard and a great black hat, which seemed to hide his face from us. I

in the lamplight, as he turned to us. He said to the driver:--

"You are early to-night, my friend." The man stammered in reply:--



"That is why, I suppose, you wished him to go on to Bukovina. You cannot
deceive me, my friend; I know too much, and my horses are swift." As he
spoke he smiled, and the lamplight fell on a hard-looking mouth, with

companions whispered to another the line from Burger's "Lenore":--


    ("For the dead travel fast.")


gleaming smile. The passenger turned his face away, at the same time
putting out his two fingers and crossing himself. "Give me the Herr's

handed out and put in the calèche. Then I descended from the side of the
coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a
hand which caught my arm in a grip of steel; his strength must have been

swept into the darkness of the Pass. As I looked back I saw the steam
from the horses of the coach by the light of the lamps, and projected

the driver cracked his whip and called to his horses, and off they swept
on their way to Bukovina. As they sank into the darkness I felt a
strange chill, and a lonely feeling came over me; but a cloak was thrown




care of you. There is a flask of slivovitz (the plum brandy of the
country) underneath the seat, if you should require it." I did not take

little strangely, and not a little frightened. I think had there been
any alternative I should have taken it, instead of prosecuting that

then we made a complete turn and went along another straight road. It
seemed to me that we were simply going over and over the same ground
again; and so I took note of some salient point, and found that this was

I really feared to do so, for I thought that, placed as I was, any
protest would have had no effect in case there had been an intention to

passing, I struck a match, and by its flame looked at my watch; it was
within a few minutes of midnight. This gave me a sort of shock, for I

recent experiences. I waited with a sick feeling of suspense.

Then a dog began to howl somewhere in a farmhouse far down the road--a

another dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind which
now sighed softly through the Pass, a wild howling began, which seemed
to come from all over the country, as far as the imagination could grasp

strain and rear, but the driver spoke to them soothingly, and they
quieted down, but shivered and sweated as though after a runaway from

side of us began a louder and a sharper howling--that of wolves--which
affected both the horses and myself in the same way--for I was minded to
jump from the calèche and run, whilst they reared again and plunged

from bolting. In a few minutes, however, my own ears got accustomed to
the sound, and the horses so far became quiet that the driver was able

whispered something in their ears, as I have heard of horse-tamers
doing, and with extraordinary effect, for under his caresses they became

took his seat, and shaking his reins, started off at a great pace. This
time, after going to the far side of the Pass, he suddenly turned down a


Soon we were hemmed in with trees, which in places arched right over the
roadway till we passed as through a tunnel; and again great frowning
rocks guarded us boldly on either side. Though we were in shelter, we

rocks, and the branches of the trees crashed together as we swept along.
It grew colder and colder still, and fine, powdery snow began to fall,

keen wind still carried the howling of the dogs, though this grew
fainter as we went on our way. The baying of the wolves sounded nearer

grew dreadfully afraid, and the horses shared my fear. The driver,
however, was not in the least disturbed; he kept turning his head to


Suddenly, away on our left, I saw a faint flickering blue flame. The
driver saw it at the same moment; he at once checked the horses, and,
jumping to the ground, disappeared into the darkness. I did not know

I wondered the driver suddenly appeared again, and without a word took
his seat, and we resumed our journey. I think I must have fallen asleep

endlessly, and now looking back, it is like a sort of awful nightmare.
Once the flame appeared so near the road, that even in the darkness

the blue flame arose--it must have been very faint, for it did not seem
to illumine the place around it at all--and gathering a few stones,
formed them into some device. Once there appeared a strange optical

for I could see its ghostly flicker all the same. This startled me, but
as the effect was only momentary, I took it that my eyes deceived me

flames, and we sped onwards through the gloom, with the howling of the
wolves around us, as though they were following in a moving circle.


had yet gone, and during his absence, the horses began to tremble worse
than ever and to snort and scream with fright. I could not see any cause
for it, for the howling of the wolves had ceased altogether; but just

jagged crest of a beetling, pine-clad rock, and by its light I saw
around us a ring of wolves, with white teeth and lolling red tongues,

terrible in the grim silence which held them than even when they howled.
For myself, I felt a sort of paralysis of fear. It is only when a man

their true import.


some peculiar effect on them. The horses jumped about and reared, and
looked helplessly round with eyes that rolled in a way painful to see;

had perforce to remain within it. I called to the coachman to come, for
it seemed to me that our only chance was to try to break out through the
ring and to aid his approach. I shouted and beat the side of the

to give him a chance of reaching the trap. How he came there, I know
not, but I heard his voice raised in a tone of imperious command, and

long arms, as though brushing aside some impalpable obstacle, the wolves
fell back and back further still. Just then a heavy cloud passed across


When I could see again the driver was climbing into the calèche, and the
wolves had disappeared. This was all so strange and uncanny that a
dreadful fear came upon me, and I was afraid to speak or move. The time

darkness, for the rolling clouds obscured the moon. We kept on
ascending, with occasional periods of quick descent, but in the main

driver was in the act of pulling up the horses in the courtyard of a
vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light,






CHAPTER II




_5 May._--I must have been asleep, for certainly if I had been fully

the gloom the courtyard looked of considerable size, and as several dark
ways led from it under great round arches, it perhaps seemed bigger than


When the calèche stopped, the driver jumped down and held out his hand
to assist me to alight. Again I could not but notice his prodigious
strength. His hand actually seemed like a steel vice that could have

them on the ground beside me as I stood close to a great door, old and
studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of

massively carved, but that the carving had been much worn by time and
weather. As I stood, the driver jumped again into his seat and shook the

of the dark openings.


or knocker there was no sign; through these frowning walls and dark
window openings it was not likely that my voice could penetrate. The

me. What sort of place had I come to, and among what kind of people?
What sort of grim adventure was it on which I had embarked? Was this a
customary incident in the life of a solicitor's clerk sent out to

clerk! Mina would not like that. Solicitor--for just before leaving
London I got word that my examination was successful; and I am now a

I were awake. It all seemed like a horrible nightmare to me, and I
expected that I should suddenly awake, and find myself at home, with

in the morning after a day of overwork. But my flesh answered the
pinching test, and my eyes were not to be deceived. I was indeed awake

wait the coming of the morning.

Just as I had come to this conclusion I heard a heavy step approaching

light. Then there was the sound of rattling chains and the clanking of
massive bolts drawn back. A key was turned with the loud grating noise


Within, stood a tall old man, clean shaven save for a long white
moustache, and clad in black from head to foot, without a single speck

lamp, in which the flame burned without chimney or globe of any kind,
throwing long quivering shadows as it flickered in the draught of the

gesture, saying in excellent English, but with a strange intonation:--

"Welcome to my house! Enter freely and of your own will!" He made no

gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone. The instant, however, that
I had stepped over the threshold, he moved impulsively forward, and
holding out his hand grasped mine with a strength which made me wince,

ice--more like the hand of a dead than a living man. Again he said:--

"Welcome to my house. Come freely. Go safely; and leave something of the

that which I had noticed in the driver, whose face I had not seen, that
for a moment I doubted if it were not the same person to whom I was


"Count Dracula?" He bowed in a courtly way as he replied:--

"I am Dracula; and I bid you welcome, Mr. Harker, to my house. Come in;

speaking, he put the lamp on a bracket on the wall, and stepping out,
took my luggage; he had carried it in before I could forestall him. I


"Nay, sir, you are my guest. It is late, and my people are not

my traps along the passage, and then up a great winding stair, and
along another great passage, on whose stone floor our steps rang

to see within a well-lit room in which a table was spread for supper,
and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs, freshly replenished,


The Count halted, putting down my bags, closed the door, and crossing

by a single lamp, and seemingly without a window of any sort. Passing
through this, he opened another door, and motioned me to enter. It was a
welcome sight; for here was a great bedroom well lighted and warmed with

fresh--which sent a hollow roar up the wide chimney. The Count himself
left my luggage inside and withdrew, saying, before he closed the



toilet. I trust you will find all you wish. When you are ready, come
into the other room, where you will find your supper prepared."

The light and warmth and the Count's courteous welcome seemed to have

I discovered that I was half famished with hunger; so making a hasty


I found supper already laid out. My host, who stood on one side of the
great fireplace, leaning against the stonework, made a graceful wave of


"I pray you, be seated and sup how you please. You will, I trust, excuse
me that I do not join you; but I have dined already, and I do not sup."


He opened it and read it gravely; then, with a charming smile, he handed
it to me to read. One passage of it, at least, gave me a thrill of


"I must regret that an attack of gout, from which malady I am a constant

come; but I am happy to say I can send a sufficient substitute, one in
whom I have every possible confidence. He is a young man, full of energy

discreet and silent, and has grown into manhood in my service. He shall
be ready to attend on you when you will during his stay, and shall take


The Count himself came forward and took off the cover of a dish, and I
fell to at once on an excellent roast chicken. This, with some cheese

my supper. During the time I was eating it the Count asked me many
questions as to my journey, and I told him by degrees all I had



up a chair by the fire and begun to smoke a cigar which he offered me,
at the same time excusing himself that he did not smoke. I had now an

physiognomy.


thin nose and peculiarly arched nostrils; with lofty domed forehead, and
hair growing scantily round the temples but profusely elsewhere. His
eyebrows were very massive, almost meeting over the nose, and with bushy

could see it under the heavy moustache, was fixed and rather
cruel-looking, with peculiarly sharp white teeth; these protruded over

man of his years. For the rest, his ears were pale, and at the tops
extremely pointed; the chin was broad and strong, and the cheeks firm


Hitherto I had noticed the backs of his hands as they lay on his knees
in the firelight, and they had seemed rather white and fine; but seeing

coarse--broad, with squat fingers. Strange to say, there were hairs in
the centre of the palm. The nails were long and fine, and cut to a sharp
point. As the Count leaned over me and his hands touched me, I could not

horrible feeling of nausea came over me, which, do what I would, I could
not conceal. The Count, evidently noticing it, drew back; and with a

protuberant teeth, sat himself down again on his own side of the
fireplace. We were both silent for a while; and as I looked towards the

strange stillness over everything; but as I listened I heard as if from
down below in the valley the howling of many wolves. The Count's eyes


"Listen to them--the children of the night. What music they make!"



"Ah, sir, you dwellers in the city cannot enter into the feelings of the


"But you must be tired. Your bedroom is all ready, and to-morrow you
shall sleep as late as you will. I have to be away till the afternoon;
so sleep well and dream well!" With a courteous bow, he opened for me


I am all in a sea of wonders. I doubt; I fear; I think strange things,
which I dare not confess to my own soul. God keep me, if only for the




_7 May._--It is again early morning, but I have rested and enjoyed the
last twenty-four hours. I slept till late in the day, and awoke of my
own accord. When I had dressed myself I went into the room where we had

pot being placed on the hearth. There was a card on the table, on which


"I have to be absent for a while. Do not wait for me.--D." I set to and
enjoyed a hearty meal. When I had done, I looked for a bell, so that I

There are certainly odd deficiencies in the house, considering the
extraordinary evidences of wealth which are round me. The table service

The curtains and upholstery of the chairs and sofas and the hangings of
my bed are of the costliest and most beautiful fabrics, and must have
been of fabulous value when they were made, for they are centuries old,

but there they were worn and frayed and moth-eaten. But still in none of
the rooms is there a mirror. There is not even a toilet glass on my

could either shave or brush my hair. I have not yet seen a servant
anywhere, or heard a sound near the castle except the howling of wolves.

breakfast or dinner, for it was between five and six o'clock when I had
it--I looked about for something to read, for I did not like to go about
the castle until I had asked the Count's permission. There was

materials; so I opened another door in the room and found a sort of
library. The door opposite mine I tried, but found it locked.


books, whole shelves full of them, and bound volumes of magazines and
newspapers. A table in the centre was littered with English magazines

were of the most varied kind--history, geography, politics, political
economy, botany, geology, law--all relating to England and English life

London Directory, the "Red" and "Blue" books, Whitaker's Almanac, the
Army and Navy Lists, and--it somehow gladdened my heart to see it--the


Whilst I was looking at the books, the door opened, and the Count

night's rest. Then he went on:--


will interest you. These companions"--and he laid his hand on some of
the books--"have been good friends to me, and for some years past, ever
since I had the idea of going to London, have given me many, many hours

know her is to love her. I long to go through the crowded streets of
your mighty London, to be in the midst of the whirl and rush of

it what it is. But alas! as yet I only know your tongue through books.
To you, my friend, I look that I know it to speak."




"I thank you, my friend, for your all too-flattering estimate, but yet I
fear that I am but a little way on the road I would travel. True, I know
the grammar and the words, but yet I know not how to speak them."



"Not so," he answered. "Well, I know that, did I move and speak in your

enough for me. Here I am noble; I am _boyar_; the common people know me,
and I am master. But a stranger in a strange land, he is no one; men
know him not--and to know not is to care not for. I am content if I am

speaking if he hear my words, 'Ha, ha! a stranger!' I have been so long
master that I would be master still--or at least that none other should

Hawkins, of Exeter, to tell me all about my new estate in London. You
shall, I trust, rest here with me awhile, so that by our talking I may

error, even of the smallest, in my speaking. I am sorry that I had to be
away so long to-day; but you will, I know, forgive one who has so many


Of course I said all I could about being willing, and asked if I might
come into that room when I chose. He answered: "Yes, certainly," and



locked, where of course you will not wish to go. There is reason that
all things are as they are, and did you see with my eyes and know with
my knowledge, you would perhaps better understand." I said I was sure of


"We are in Transylvania; and Transylvania is not England. Our ways are

what you have told me of your experiences already, you know something of


This led to much conversation; and as it was evident that he wanted to
talk, if only for talking's sake, I asked him many questions regarding

Sometimes he sheered off the subject, or turned the conversation by
pretending not to understand; but generally he answered all I asked most
frankly. Then as time went on, and I had got somewhat bolder, I asked

instance, why the coachman went to the places where he had seen the blue
flames. He then explained to me that it was commonly believed that on a

are supposed to have unchecked sway--a blue flame is seen over any place
where treasure has been concealed. "That treasure has been hidden," he
went on, "in the region through which you came last night, there can be

Wallachian, the Saxon, and the Turk. Why, there is hardly a foot of soil
in all this region that has not been enriched by the blood of men,

Austrian and the Hungarian came up in hordes, and the patriots went out
to meet them--men and women, the aged and the children too--and waited

destruction on them with their artificial avalanches. When the invader
was triumphant he found but little, for whatever there was had been


"But how," said I, "can it have remained so long undiscovered, when
there is a sure index to it if men will but take the trouble to look?"

sharp, canine teeth showed out strangely; he answered:--

"Because your peasant is at heart a coward and a fool! Those flames only

can help it, stir without his doors. And, dear sir, even if he did he
would not know what to do. Why, even the peasant that you tell me of who

even for his own work. Even you would not, I dare be sworn, be able to


"There you are right," I said. "I know no more than the dead where even
to look for them." Then we drifted into other matters.


have procured for me." With an apology for my remissness, I went into my
own room to get the papers from my bag. Whilst I was placing them in
order I heard a rattling of china and silver in the next room, and as I

lit, for it was by this time deep into the dark. The lamps were also lit
in the study or library, and I found the Count lying on the sofa,

came in he cleared the books and papers from the table; and with him I
went into plans and deeds and figures of all sorts. He was interested in

surroundings. He clearly had studied beforehand all he could get on the
subject of the neighbourhood, for he evidently at the end knew very much


"Well, but, my friend, is it not needful that I should? When I go there
I shall be all alone, and my friend Harker Jonathan--nay, pardon me, I
fall into my country's habit of putting your patronymic first--my friend

in Exeter, miles away, probably working at papers of the law with my


We went thoroughly into the business of the purchase of the estate at
Purfleet. When I had told him the facts and got his signature to the

Mr. Hawkins, he began to ask me how I had come across so suitable a
place. I read to him the notes which I had made at the time, and which I


"At Purfleet, on a by-road, I came across just such a place as seemed to
be required, and where was displayed a dilapidated notice that the place

built of heavy stones, and has not been repaired for a large number of
years. The closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron, all eaten with



Face_, as the house is four-sided, agreeing with the cardinal points of
the compass. It contains in all some twenty acres, quite surrounded by
the solid stone wall above mentioned. There are many trees on it, which

small lake, evidently fed by some springs, as the water is clear and
flows away in a fair-sized stream. The house is very large and of all

immensely thick, with only a few windows high up and heavily barred with
iron. It looks like part of a keep, and is close to an old chapel or

to it from the house, but I have taken with my kodak views of it from
various points. The house has been added to, but in a very straggling
way, and I can only guess at the amount of ground it covers, which must

large house only recently added to and formed into a private lunatic
asylum. It is not, however, visible from the grounds."



"I am glad that it is old and big. I myself am of an old family, and to

day; and, after all, how few days go to make up a century. I rejoice
also that there is a chapel of old times. We Transylvanian nobles love

gaiety nor mirth, not the bright voluptuousness of much sunshine and
sparkling waters which please the young and gay. I am no longer young;
and my heart, through weary years of mourning over the dead, is not

shadows are many, and the wind breathes cold through the broken
battlements and casements. I love the shade and the shadow, and would

did not seem to accord, or else it was that his cast of face made his


Presently, with an excuse, he left me, asking me to put all my papers
together. He was some little time away, and I began to look at some of

England, as if that map had been much used. On looking at it I found in
certain places little rings marked, and on examining these I noticed
that one was near London on the east side, manifestly where his new



It was the better part of an hour when the Count returned. "Aha!" he
said; "still at your books? Good! But you must not work always. Come; I
am informed that your supper is ready." He took my arm, and we went into

Count again excused himself, as he had dined out on his being away from
home. But he sat as on the previous night, and chatted whilst I ate.

me, chatting and asking questions on every conceivable subject, hour
after hour. I felt that it was getting very late indeed, but I did not
say anything, for I felt under obligation to meet my host's wishes in

me; but I could not help experiencing that chill which comes over one at
the coming of the dawn, which is like, in its way, the turn of the tide.

the dawn or at the turn of the tide; any one who has when tired, and
tied as it were to his post, experienced this change in the atmosphere
can well believe it. All at once we heard the crow of a cock coming up

Dracula, jumping to his feet, said:--


long. You must make your conversation regarding my dear new country of
England less interesting, so that I may not forget how time flies by


I went into my own room and drew the curtains, but there was little to
notice; my window opened into the courtyard, all I could see was the

written of this day.



_8 May._--I began to fear as I wrote in this book that I was getting too

there is something so strange about this place and all in it that I
cannot but feel uneasy. I wish I were safe out of it, or that I had

me; but would that that were all! If there were any one to talk to I
could bear it, but there is no one. I have only the Count to speak with,
and he!--I fear I am myself the only living soul within the place. Let

imagination must not run riot with me. If it does I am lost. Let me say


I only slept a few hours when I went to bed, and feeling that I could
not sleep any more, got up. I had hung my shaving glass by the window,

and heard the Count's voice saying to me, "Good-morning." I started, for
it amazed me that I had not seen him, since the reflection of the glass
covered the whole room behind me. In starting I had cut myself slightly,

salutation, I turned to the glass again to see how I had been mistaken.
This time there could be no error, for the man was close to me, and I

the mirror! The whole room behind me was displayed; but there was no
sign of a man in it, except myself. This was startling, and, coming on
the top of so many strange things, was beginning to increase that vague

the instant I saw that the cut had bled a little, and the blood was
trickling over my chin. I laid down the razor, turning as I did so half

eyes blazed with a sort of demoniac fury, and he suddenly made a grab at
my throat. I drew away, and his hand touched the string of beads which
held the crucifix. It made an instant change in him, for the fury passed


"Take care," he said, "take care how you cut yourself. It is more
dangerous than you think in this country." Then seizing the shaving

mischief. It is a foul bauble of man's vanity. Away with it!" and
opening the heavy window with one wrench of his terrible hand, he flung

of the courtyard far below. Then he withdrew without a word. It is very
annoying, for I do not see how I am to shave, unless in my watch-case or


When I went into the dining-room, breakfast was prepared; but I could
not find the Count anywhere. So I breakfasted alone. It is strange that

peculiar man! After breakfast I did a little exploring in the castle. I
went out on the stairs, and found a room looking towards the South. The
view was magnificent, and from where I stood there was every opportunity

stone falling from the window would fall a thousand feet without
touching anything! As far as the eye can reach is a sea of green tree

there are silver threads where the rivers wind in deep gorges through


But I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I had seen the view I
explored further; doors, doors, doors everywhere, and all locked and

an available exit.








JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_



I rushed up and down the stairs, trying every door and peering out of
every window I could find; but after a little the conviction of my

few hours I think I must have been mad for the time, for I behaved much
as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to me
that I was helpless I sat down quietly--as quietly as I have ever done

am thinking still, and as yet have come to no definite conclusion. Of
one thing only am I certain; that it is no use making my ideas known to

himself, and has doubtless his own motives for it, he would only deceive
me if I trusted him fully with the facts. So far as I can see, my only
plan will be to keep my knowledge and my fears to myself, and my eyes

or else I am in desperate straits; and if the latter be so, I need, and


I had hardly come to this conclusion when I heard the great door below
shut, and knew that the Count had returned. He did not come at once into
the library, so I went cautiously to my own room and found him making

thought--that there were no servants in the house. When later I saw him
through the chink of the hinges of the door laying the table in the

menial offices, surely it is proof that there is no one else to do them.
This gave me a fright, for if there is no one else in the castle, it

brought me here. This is a terrible thought; for if so, what does it
mean that he could control the wolves, as he did, by only holding up his
hand in silence. How was it that all the people at Bistritz and on the

crucifix, of the garlic, of the wild rose, of the mountain ash? Bless
that good, good woman who hung the crucifix round my neck! for it is a

which I have been taught to regard with disfavour and as idolatrous
should in a time of loneliness and trouble be of help. Is it that there
is something in the essence of the thing itself, or that it is a medium,

time, if it may be, I must examine this matter and try to make up my
mind about it. In the meantime I must find out all I can about Count

himself, if I turn the conversation that way. I must be very careful,


       *       *       *       *       *


questions on Transylvania history, and he warmed up to the subject
wonderfully. In his speaking of things and people, and especially of

afterwards explained by saying that to a _boyar_ the pride of his house
and name is his own pride, that their glory is his glory, that their
fate is his fate. Whenever he spoke of his house he always said "we,"

down all he said exactly as he said it, for to me it was most
fascinating. It seemed to have in it a whole history of the country. He

white moustache and grasping anything on which he laid his hands as
though he would crush it by main strength. One thing he said which I

his race:--


of many brave races who fought as the lion fights, for lordship. Here,
in the whirlpool of European races, the Ugric tribe bore down from

Berserkers displayed to such fell intent on the seaboards of Europe, ay,
and of Asia and Africa too, till the peoples thought that the

the Huns, whose warlike fury had swept the earth like a living flame,
till the dying peoples held that in their veins ran the blood of those
old witches, who, expelled from Scythia had mated with the devils in the

Attila, whose blood is in these veins?" He held up his arms. "Is it a
wonder that we were a conquering race; that we were proud; that when the

thousands on our frontiers, we drove them back? Is it strange that when
Arpad and his legions swept through the Hungarian fatherland he found us

there? And when the Hungarian flood swept eastward, the Szekelys were
claimed as kindred by the victorious Magyars, and to us for centuries
was trusted the guarding of the frontier of Turkey-land; ay, and more

'water sleeps, and enemy is sleepless.' Who more gladly than we
throughout the Four Nations received the 'bloody sword,' or at its

redeemed that great shame of my nation, the shame of Cassova, when the
flags of the Wallach and the Magyar went down beneath the Crescent? Who

the Turk on his own ground? This was a Dracula indeed! Woe was it that
his own unworthy brother, when he had fallen, sold his people to the
Turk and brought the shame of slavery on them! Was it not this Dracula,

again brought his forces over the great river into Turkey-land; who,
when he was beaten back, came again, and again, and again, though he had

slaughtered, since he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph! They
said that he thought only of himself. Bah! what good are peasants

conduct it? Again, when, after the battle of Mohács, we threw off the
Hungarian yoke, we of the Dracula blood were amongst their leaders, for

Szekelys--and the Dracula as their heart's blood, their brains, and
their swords--can boast a record that mushroom growths like the
Hapsburgs and the Romanoffs can never reach. The warlike days are over.

the glories of the great races are as a tale that is told."

It was by this time close on morning, and we went to bed. (_Mem._, this

everything has to break off at cockcrow--or like the ghost of Hamlet's





books and figures, and of which there can be no doubt. I must not

observation, or my memory of them. Last evening when the Count came from
his room he began by asking me questions on legal matters and on the
doing of certain kinds of business. I had spent the day wearily over

matters I had been examined in at Lincoln's Inn. There was a certain
method in the Count's inquiries, so I shall try to put them down in


First, he asked if a man in England might have two solicitors or more. I
told him he might have a dozen if he wished, but that it would not be

one could act at a time, and that to change would be certain to militate
against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and went on to
ask if there would be any practical difficulty in having one man to

local help were needed in a place far from the home of the banking
solicitor. I asked him to explain more fully, so that I might not by any


"I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under

London, buys for me through your good self my place at London. Good! Now
here let me say frankly, lest you should think it strange that I have
sought the services of one so far off from London instead of some one

served save my wish only; and as one of London residence might, perhaps,
have some purpose of himself or friend to serve, I went thus afield to

I, who have much of affairs, wish to ship goods, say, to Newcastle, or
Durham, or Harwich, or Dover, might it not be that it could with more
ease be done by consigning to one in these ports?" I answered that

agency one for the other, so that local work could be done locally on
instruction from any solicitor, so that the client, simply placing

him without further trouble.



"Of course," I replied; and "such is often done by men of business, who
do not like the whole of their affairs to be known by any one person."


consignments and the forms to be gone through, and of all sorts of
difficulties which might arise, but by forethought could be guarded
against. I explained all these things to him to the best of my ability,

wonderful solicitor, for there was nothing that he did not think of or
foresee. For a man who was never in the country, and who did not

wonderful. When he had satisfied himself on these points of which he had
spoken, and I had verified all as well as I could by the books


"Have you written since your first letter to our friend Mr. Peter

I answered that I had not, that as yet I had not seen any opportunity of
sending letters to anybody.


shoulder: "write to our friend and to any other; and say, if it will
please you, that you shall stay with me until a month from now."




"I desire it much; nay, I will take no refusal. When your master,
employer, what you will, engaged that someone should come on his behalf,

stinted. Is it not so?"


mine, and I had to think of him, not myself; and besides, while Count
Dracula was speaking, there was that in his eyes and in his bearing
which made me remember that I was a prisoner, and that if I wished it I

mastery in the trouble of my face, for he began at once to use them, but


"I pray you, my good young friend, that you will not discourse of things
other than business in your letters. It will doubtless please your

home to them. Is it not so?" As he spoke he handed me three sheets of
note-paper and three envelopes. They were all of the thinnest foreign
post, and looking at them, then at him, and noticing his quiet smile,

as well as if he had spoken that I should be careful what I wrote, for
he would be able to read it. So I determined to write only formal notes

to her I could write in shorthand, which would puzzle the Count, if he
did see it. When I had written my two letters I sat quiet, reading a
book whilst the Count wrote several notes, referring as he wrote them to

own, and put by his writing materials, after which, the instant the door
had closed behind him, I leaned over and looked at the letters, which

under the circumstances I felt that I should protect myself in every way


One of the letters was directed to Samuel F. Billington, No. 7, The
Crescent, Whitby, another to Herr Leutner, Varna; the third was to

bankers, Buda-Pesth. The second and fourth were unsealed. I was just
about to look at them when I saw the door-handle move. I sank back in my

to resume my book before the Count, holding still another letter in his
hand, entered the room. He took up the letters on the table and stamped


"I trust you will forgive me, but I have much work to do in private this
evening. You will, I hope, find all things as you wish." At the door he


"Let me advise you, my dear young friend--nay, let me warn you with all
seriousness, that should you leave these rooms you will not by any

many memories, and there are bad dreams for those who sleep unwisely. Be
warned! Should sleep now or ever overcome you, or be like to do, then

safe. But if you be not careful in this respect, then"--He finished his
speech in a gruesome way, for he motioned with his hands as if he were
washing them. I quite understood; my only doubt was as to whether any

and mystery which seemed closing around me.



_Later._--I endorse the last words written, but this time there is no
doubt in question. I shall not fear to sleep in any place where he is

my rest is thus freer from dreams; and there it shall remain.

When he left me I went to my room. After a little while, not hearing any

towards the South. There was some sense of freedom in the vast expanse,
inaccessible though it was to me, as compared with the narrow darkness

prison, and I seemed to want a breath of fresh air, though it were of
the night. I am beginning to feel this nocturnal existence tell on me.
It is destroying my nerve. I start at my own shadow, and am full of all

terrible fear in this accursed place! I looked out over the beautiful
expanse, bathed in soft yellow moonlight till it was almost as light as

in the valleys and gorges of velvety blackness. The mere beauty seemed
to cheer me; there was peace and comfort in every breath I drew. As I
leaned from the window my eye was caught by something moving a storey

the rooms, that the windows of the Count's own room would look out. The
window at which I stood was tall and deep, stone-mullioned, and though

the case had been there. I drew back behind the stonework, and looked


What I saw was the Count's head coming out from the window. I did not
see the face, but I knew the man by the neck and the movement of his

so many opportunities of studying. I was at first interested and
somewhat amused, for it is wonderful how small a matter will interest

repulsion and terror when I saw the whole man slowly emerge from the
window and begin to crawl down the castle wall over that dreadful abyss,
_face down_ with his cloak spreading out around him like great wings. At

moonlight, some weird effect of shadow; but I kept looking, and it could
be no delusion. I saw the fingers and toes grasp the corners of the

using every projection and inequality move downwards with considerable
speed, just as a lizard moves along a wall.


semblance of man? I feel the dread of this horrible place overpowering
me; I am in fear--in awful fear--and there is no escape for me; I am


       *       *       *       *       *


He moved downwards in a sidelong way, some hundred feet down, and a good
deal to the left. He vanished into some hole or window. When his head

avail--the distance was too great to allow a proper angle of sight. I
knew he had left the castle now, and thought to use the opportunity to
explore more than I had dared to do as yet. I went back to the room, and

expected, and the locks were comparatively new; but I went down the
stone stairs to the hall where I had entered originally. I found I could

door was locked, and the key was gone! That key must be in the Count's
room; I must watch should his door be unlocked, so that I may get it and
escape. I went on to make a thorough examination of the various stairs

small rooms near the hall were open, but there was nothing to see in
them except old furniture, dusty with age and moth-eaten. At last,

seemed to be locked, gave a little under pressure. I tried it harder,
and found that it was not really locked, but that the resistance came

rested on the floor. Here was an opportunity which I might not have
again, so I exerted myself, and with many efforts forced it back so that

than the rooms I knew and a storey lower down. From the windows I could
see that the suite of rooms lay along to the south of the castle, the
windows of the end room looking out both west and south. On the latter

was built on the corner of a great rock, so that on three sides it was
quite impregnable, and great windows were placed here where sling, or

impossible to a position which had to be guarded, were secured. To the
west was a great valley, and then, rising far away, great jagged

mountain ash and thorn, whose roots clung in cracks and crevices and
crannies of the stone. This was evidently the portion of the castle
occupied by the ladies in bygone days, for the furniture had more air of

yellow moonlight, flooding in through the diamond panes, enabled one to
see even colours, whilst it softened the wealth of dust which lay over

lamp seemed to be of little effect in the brilliant moonlight, but I was
glad to have it with me, for there was a dread loneliness in the place
which chilled my heart and made my nerves tremble. Still, it was better

presence of the Count, and after trying a little to school my nerves, I
found a soft quietude come over me. Here I am, sitting at a little oak

thought and many blushes, her ill-spelt love-letter, and writing in my
diary in shorthand all that has happened since I closed it last. It is

senses deceive me, the old centuries had, and have, powers of their own
which mere "modernity" cannot kill.



_Later: the Morning of 16 May._--God preserve my sanity, for to this I

Whilst I live on here there is but one thing to hope for, that I may not
go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely it

hateful place the Count is the least dreadful to me; that to him alone I
can look for safety, even though this be only whilst I can serve his
purpose. Great God! merciful God! Let me be calm, for out of that way

have puzzled me. Up to now I never quite knew what Shakespeare meant


    "My tablets! quick, my tablets!


for now, feeling as though my own brain were unhinged or as if the shock
had come which must end in its undoing, I turn to my diary for repose.


The Count's mysterious warning frightened me at the time; it frightens
me more now when I think of it, for in future he has a fearful hold upon


When I had written in my diary and had fortunately replaced the book and

but I took a pleasure in disobeying it. The sense of sleep was upon me,
and with it the obstinacy which sleep brings as outrider. The soft
moonlight soothed, and the wide expanse without gave a sense of freedom

gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladies had sat
and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad for

couch out of its place near the corner, so that as I lay, I could look
at the lovely view to east and south, and unthinking of and uncaring for

asleep; I hope so, but I fear, for all that followed was startlingly
real--so real that now sitting here in the broad, full sunlight of the


I was not alone. The room was the same, unchanged in any way since I
came into it; I could see along the floor, in the brilliant moonlight,

dust. In the moonlight opposite me were three young women, ladies by
their dress and manner. I thought at the time that I must be dreaming
when I saw them, for, though the moonlight was behind them, they threw

time, and then whispered together. Two were dark, and had high aquiline
noses, like the Count, and great dark, piercing eyes that seemed to be

fair, as fair as can be, with great wavy masses of golden hair and eyes
like pale sapphires. I seemed somehow to know her face, and to know it
in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could not recollect at the

pearls against the ruby of their voluptuous lips. There was something
about them that made me uneasy, some longing and at the same time some

kiss me with those red lips. It is not good to note this down, lest some
day it should meet Mina's eyes and cause her pain; but it is the truth.
They whispered together, and then they all three laughed--such a

come through the softness of human lips. It was like the intolerable,
tingling sweetness of water-glasses when played on by a cunning hand.

on. One said:--




"He is young and strong; there are kisses for us all." I lay quiet,
looking out under my eyelashes in an agony of delightful anticipation.
The fair girl advanced and bent over me till I could feel the movement

the same tingling through the nerves as her voice, but with a bitter
underlying the sweet, a bitter offensiveness, as one smells in blood.


the lashes. The girl went on her knees, and bent over me, simply
gloating. There was a deliberate voluptuousness which was both thrilling
and repulsive, and as she arched her neck she actually licked her lips

on the scarlet lips and on the red tongue as it lapped the white sharp
teeth. Lower and lower went her head as the lips went below the range of

paused, and I could hear the churning sound of her tongue as it licked
her teeth and lips, and could feel the hot breath on my neck. Then the

is to tickle it approaches nearer--nearer. I could feel the soft,
shivering touch of the lips on the super-sensitive skin of my throat,
and the hard dents of two sharp teeth, just touching and pausing there.



But at that instant, another sensation swept through me as quick as
lightning. I was conscious of the presence of the Count, and of his

saw his strong hand grasp the slender neck of the fair woman and with
giant's power draw it back, the blue eyes transformed with fury, the
white teeth champing with rage, and the fair cheeks blazing red with

the demons of the pit. His eyes were positively blazing. The red light
in them was lurid, as if the flames of hell-fire blazed behind them. His

the thick eyebrows that met over the nose now seemed like a heaving bar
of white-hot metal. With a fierce sweep of his arm, he hurled the woman
from him, and then motioned to the others, as though he were beating

wolves. In a voice which, though low and almost in a whisper seemed to
cut through the air and then ring round the room he said:--


I had forbidden it? Back, I tell you all! This man belongs to me! Beware
how you meddle with him, or you'll have to deal with me." The fair girl,


"You yourself never loved; you never love!" On this the other women
joined, and such a mirthless, hard, soulless laughter rang through the

of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at my face attentively,



not so? Well, now I promise you that when I am done with him you shall
kiss him at your will. Now go! go! I must awaken him, for there is work



as she pointed to the bag which he had thrown upon the floor, and which
moved as though there were some living thing within it. For answer he
nodded his head. One of the women jumped forward and opened it. If my

half-smothered child. The women closed round, whilst I was aghast with
horror; but as I looked they disappeared, and with them the dreadful

without my noticing. They simply seemed to fade into the rays of the
moonlight and pass out through the window, for I could see outside the


Then the horror overcame me, and I sank down unconscious.






JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_



have carried me here. I tried to satisfy myself on the subject, but
could not arrive at any unquestionable result. To be sure, there were

in a manner which was not my habit. My watch was still unwound, and I am
rigorously accustomed to wind it the last thing before going to bed, and
many such details. But these things are no proof, for they may have been

another, I had certainly been much upset. I must watch for proof. Of one
thing I am glad: if it was that the Count carried me here and undressed

am sure this diary would have been a mystery to him which he would not
have brooked. He would have taken or destroyed it. As I look round this

sanctuary, for nothing can be more dreadful than those awful women, who
were--who _are_--waiting to suck my blood.



_18 May._--I have been down to look at that room again in daylight, for

stairs I found it closed. It had been so forcibly driven against the
jamb that part of the woodwork was splintered. I could see that the bolt
of the lock had not been shot, but the door is fastened from the inside.


       *       *       *       *       *


the suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that my work here
was nearly done, and that I should start for home within a few days,

letter, and the third that I had left the castle and arrived at
Bistritz. I would fain have rebelled, but felt that in the present state

am so absolutely in his power; and to refuse would be to excite his
suspicion and to arouse his anger. He knows that I know too much, and
that I must not live, lest I be dangerous to him; my only chance is to

chance to escape. I saw in his eyes something of that gathering wrath
which was manifest when he hurled that fair woman from him. He explained

ensure ease of mind to my friends; and he assured me with so much
impressiveness that he would countermand the later letters, which would

prolonging my stay, that to oppose him would have been to create new
suspicion. I therefore pretended to fall in with his views, and asked
him what dates I should put on the letters. He calculated a minute, and





I know now the span of my life. God help me!



_28 May._--There is a chance of escape, or at any rate of being able to
send word home. A band of Szgany have come to the castle, and are

them in my book. They are peculiar to this part of the world, though
allied to the ordinary gipsies all the world over. There are thousands
of them in Hungary and Transylvania, who are almost outside all law.

call themselves by his name. They are fearless and without religion,
save superstition, and they talk only their own varieties of the Romany



posted. I have already spoken them through my window to begin
acquaintanceship. They took their hats off and made obeisance and many

their spoken language....



I have written the letters. Mina's is in shorthand, and I simply ask Mr.
Hawkins to communicate with her. To her I have explained my situation,

frighten her to death were I to expose my heart to her. Should the
letters not carry, then the Count shall not yet know my secret or the




I have given the letters; I threw them through the bars of my window
with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to have them posted. The

in his cap. I could do no more. I stole back to the study, and began to
read. As the Count did not come in, I have written here....



The Count has come. He sat down beside me, and said in his smoothest


"The Szgany has given me these, of which, though I know not whence they
come, I shall, of course, take care. See!"--he must have looked at

he caught sight of the strange symbols as he opened the envelope, and
the dark look came into his face, and his eyes blazed wickedly--"the

not signed. Well! so it cannot matter to us." And he calmly held letter
and envelope in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed. Then he


"The letter to Hawkins--that I shall, of course, send on, since it is

unknowingly I did break the seal. Will you not cover it again?" He held
out the letter to me, and with a courteous bow handed me a clean

he went out of the room I could hear the key turn softly. A minute later
I went over and tried it, and the door was locked.


coming awakened me, for I had gone to sleep on the sofa. He was very
courteous and very cheery in his manner, and seeing that I had been


"So, my friend, you are tired? Get to bed. There is the surest rest. I

to me; but you will sleep, I pray." I passed to my room and went to bed,
and, strange to say, slept without dreaming. Despair has its own calms.



_31 May._--This morning when I woke I thought I would provide myself
with some paper and envelopes from my bag and keep them in my pocket, so

surprise, again a shock!


relating to railways and travel, my letter of credit, in fact all that
might be useful to me were I once outside the castle. I sat and pondered
awhile, and then some thought occurred to me, and I made search of my


The suit in which I had travelled was gone, and also my overcoat and
rug; I could find no trace of them anywhere. This looked like some new




_17 June._--This morning, as I was sitting on the edge of my bed
cudgelling my brains, I heard without a cracking of whips and pounding

With joy I hurried to the window, and saw drive into the yard two great
leiter-wagons, each drawn by eight sturdy horses, and at the head of

sheepskin, and high boots. They had also their long staves in hand. I
ran to the door, intending to descend and try and join them through the
main hall, as I thought that way might be opened for them. Again a


Then I ran to the window and cried to them. They looked up at me

and seeing them pointing to my window, said something, at which they
laughed. Henceforth no effort of mine, no piteous cry or agonised

The leiter-wagons contained great, square boxes, with handles of thick
rope; these were evidently empty by the ease with which the Slovaks
handled them, and by their resonance as they were roughly moved. When

yard, the Slovaks were given some money by the Szgany, and spitting on
it for luck, lazily went each to his horse's head. Shortly afterwards, I


       *       *       *       *       *


locked himself into his own room. As soon as I dared I ran up the
winding stair, and looked out of the window, which opened south. I

The Szgany are quartered somewhere in the castle and are doing work of
some kind. I know it, for now and then I hear a far-away muffled sound
as of mattock and spade, and, whatever it is, it must be the end of some



something coming out of the Count's window. I drew back and watched
carefully, and saw the whole man emerge. It was a new shock to me to

travelling here, and slung over his shoulder the terrible bag which I
had seen the women take away. There could be no doubt as to his quest,
and in my garb, too! This, then, is his new scheme of evil: that he will

evidence that I have been seen in the towns or villages posting my own
letters, and that any wickedness which he may do shall by the local


It makes me rage to think that this can go on, and whilst I am shut up

is even a criminal's right and consolation.

I thought I would watch for the Count's return, and for a long time sat

quaint little specks floating in the rays of the moonlight. They were
like the tiniest grains of dust, and they whirled round and gathered in

soothing, and a sort of calm stole over me. I leaned back in the
embrasure in a more comfortable position, so that I could enjoy more


Something made me start up, a low, piteous howling of dogs somewhere far

ring in my ears, and the floating motes of dust to take new shapes to
the sound as they danced in the moonlight. I felt myself struggling to
awake to some call of my instincts; nay, my very soul was struggling,

was becoming hypnotised! Quicker and quicker danced the dust; the
moonbeams seemed to quiver as they went by me into the mass of gloom

shapes. And then I started, broad awake and in full possession of my
senses, and ran screaming from the place. The phantom shapes, which were

three ghostly women to whom I was doomed. I fled, and felt somewhat
safer in my own room, where there was no moonlight and where the lamp


When a couple of hours had passed I heard something stirring in the

there was silence, deep, awful silence, which chilled me. With a
beating heart, I tried the door; but I was locked in my prison, and


As I sat I heard a sound in the courtyard without--the agonised cry of a
woman. I rushed to the window, and throwing it up, peered out between

hands over her heart as one distressed with running. She was leaning
against a corner of the gateway. When she saw my face at the window she


"Monster, give me my child!"

She threw herself on her knees, and raising up her hands, cried the same

breast, and abandoned herself to all the violences of extravagant
emotion. Finally, she threw herself forward, and, though I could not see


Somewhere high overhead, probably on the tower, I heard the voice of the
Count calling in his harsh, metallic whisper. His call seemed to be

had passed a pack of them poured, like a pent-up dam when liberated,
through the wide entrance into the courtyard.


short. Before long they streamed away singly, licking their lips.

I could not pity her, for I knew now what had become of her child, and


What shall I do? what can I do? How can I escape from this dreadful




_25 June, morning._--No man knows till he has suffered from the night
how sweet and how dear to his heart and eye the morning can be. When the

gateway opposite my window, the high spot which it touched seemed to me
as if the dove from the ark had lighted there. My fear fell from me as
if it had been a vaporous garment which dissolved in the warmth. I must

night one of my post-dated letters went to post, the first of that fatal
series which is to blot out the very traces of my existence from the




It has always been at night-time that I have been molested or
threatened, or in some way in danger or in fear. I have not yet seen the

he may be awake whilst they sleep? If I could only get into his room!
But there is no possible way. The door is always locked, no way for me.


why may not another body go? I have seen him myself crawl from his
window. Why should not I imitate him, and go in by his window? The

it. At the worst it can only be death; and a man's death is not a
calf's, and the dreaded Hereafter may still be open to me. God help me
in my task! Good-bye, Mina, if I fail; good-bye, my faithful friend and




_Same day, later._--I have made the effort, and God, helping me, have
come safely back to this room. I must put down every detail in order. I
went whilst my courage was fresh straight to the window on the south

around the building on this side. The stones are big and roughly cut,
and the mortar has by process of time been washed away between them. I

once, so as to make sure that a sudden glimpse of the awful depth would
not overcome me, but after that kept my eyes away from it. I knew pretty
well the direction and distance of the Count's window, and made for it

not feel dizzy--I suppose I was too excited--and the time seemed
ridiculously short till I found myself standing on the window-sill and

I bent down and slid feet foremost in through the window. Then I looked
around for the Count, but, with surprise and gladness, made a discovery.
The room was empty! It was barely furnished with odd things, which

style as that in the south rooms, and was covered with dust. I looked
for the key, but it was not in the lock, and I could not find it

corner--gold of all kinds, Roman, and British, and Austrian, and
Hungarian, and Greek and Turkish money, covered with a film of dust, as

less than three hundred years old. There were also chains and ornaments,


At one corner of the room was a heavy door. I tried it, for, since I
could not find the key of the room or the key of the outer door, which
was the main object of my search, I must make further examination, or

passage to a circular stairway, which went steeply down. I descended,
minding carefully where I went, for the stairs were dark, being only lit

tunnel-like passage, through which came a deathly, sickly odour, the
odour of old earth newly turned. As I went through the passage the smell
grew closer and heavier. At last I pulled open a heavy door which stood

been used as a graveyard. The roof was broken, and in two places were
steps leading to vaults, but the ground had recently been dug over, and

brought by the Slovaks. There was nobody about, and I made search for
any further outlet, but there was none. Then I went over every inch of

vaults, where the dim light struggled, although to do so was a dread to
my very soul. Into two of these I went, but saw nothing except fragments
of old coffins and piles of dust; in the third, however, I made a



pile of newly dug earth, lay the Count! He was either dead or asleep, I
could not say which--for the eyes were open and stony, but without the
glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all

movement, no pulse, no breath, no beating of the heart. I bent over him,
and tried to find any sign of life, but in vain. He could not have lain

By the side of the box was its cover, pierced with holes here and there.
I thought he might have the keys on him, but when I went to search I saw
the dead eyes, and in them, dead though they were, such a look of hate,

leaving the Count's room by the window, crawled again up the castle
wall. Regaining my room, I threw myself panting upon the bed and tried




_29 June._--To-day is the date of my last letter, and the Count has
taken steps to prove that it was genuine, for again I saw him leave the

lizard fashion, I wished I had a gun or some lethal weapon, that I might
destroy him; but I fear that no weapon wrought alone by man's hand would
have any effect on him. I dared not wait to see him return, for I feared



I was awakened by the Count, who looked at me as grimly as a man can


"To-morrow, my friend, we must part. You return to your beautiful
England, I to some work which may have such an end that we may never

here, but all shall be ready for your journey. In the morning come the
Szgany, who have some labours of their own here, and also come some
Slovaks. When they have gone, my carriage shall come for you, and shall

Bistritz. But I am in hopes that I shall see more of you at Castle

Sincerity! It seems like a profanation of the word to write it in
connection with such a monster, so asked him point-blank:--



"Because, dear sir, my coachman and horses are away on a mission."


such a soft, smooth, diabolical smile that I knew there was some trick
behind his smoothness. He said:--





The Count stood up, and said, with a sweet courtesy which made me rub my


"You English have a saying which is close to my heart, for its spirit is
that which rules our _boyars_: 'Welcome the coming; speed the parting
guest.' Come with me, my dear young friend. Not an hour shall you wait

you so suddenly desire it. Come!" With a stately gravity, he, with the
lamp, preceded me down the stairs and along the hall. Suddenly he





sound sprang up at the rising of his hand, just as the music of a great
orchestra seems to leap under the bâton of the conductor. After a pause
of a moment, he proceeded, in his stately way, to the door, drew back



To my intense astonishment I saw that it was unlocked. Suspiciously, I
looked all round, but could see no key of any kind.


and angrier; their red jaws, with champing teeth, and their blunt-clawed
feet as they leaped, came in through the opening door. I knew then that

allies as these at his command, I could do nothing. But still the door
continued slowly to open, and only the Count's body stood in the gap.
Suddenly it struck me that this might be the moment and means of my

was a diabolical wickedness in the idea great enough for the Count, and


"Shut the door; I shall wait till morning!" and covered my face with my
hands to hide my tears of bitter disappointment. With one sweep of his
powerful arm, the Count threw the door shut, and the great bolts clanged


In silence we returned to the library, and after a minute or two I went
to my own room. The last I saw of Count Dracula was his kissing his hand

Judas in hell might be proud of.


whispering at my door. I went to it softly and listened. Unless my ears



patience! To-night is mine. To-morrow night is yours!" There was a low,
sweet ripple of laughter, and in a rage I threw open the door, and saw

all joined in a horrible laugh, and ran away.

I came back to my room and threw myself on my knees. It is then so near



       *       *       *       *       *


diary. I slept till just before the dawn, and when I woke threw myself
on my knees, for I determined that if Death came he should find me


At last I felt that subtle change in the air, and knew that the morning

With a glad heart, I opened my door and ran down to the hall. I had seen
that the door was unlocked, and now escape was before me. With hands

massive bolts.


the door, and shook it till, massive as it was, it rattled in its
casement. I could see the bolt shot. It had been locked after I left the



determined then and there to scale the wall again and gain the Count's
room. He might kill me, but death now seemed the happier choice of
evils. Without a pause I rushed up to the east window, and scrambled

was as I expected. I could not see a key anywhere, but the heap of gold
remained. I went through the door in the corner and down the winding

enough where to find the monster I sought.


was laid on it, not fastened down, but with the nails ready in their
places to be hammered home. I knew I must reach the body for the key, so
I raised the lid, and laid it back against the wall; and then I saw

but looking as if his youth had been half renewed, for the white hair
and moustache were changed to dark iron-grey; the cheeks were fuller,

ever, for on the lips were gouts of fresh blood, which trickled from the
corners of the mouth and ran over the chin and neck. Even the deep,
burning eyes seemed set amongst swollen flesh, for the lids and pouches

simply gorged with blood. He lay like a filthy leech, exhausted with his
repletion. I shuddered as I bent over to touch him, and every sense in

coming night might see my own body a banquet in a similar way to those
horrid three. I felt all over the body, but no sign could I find of the
key. Then I stopped and looked at the Count. There was a mocking smile

was helping to transfer to London, where, perhaps, for centuries to come
he might, amongst its teeming millions, satiate his lust for blood, and

helpless. The very thought drove me mad. A terrible desire came upon me
to rid the world of such a monster. There was no lethal weapon at hand,

cases, and lifting it high, struck, with the edge downward, at the
hateful face. But as I did so the head turned, and the eyes fell full
upon me, with all their blaze of basilisk horror. The sight seemed to

merely making a deep gash above the forehead. The shovel fell from my
hand across the box, and as I pulled it away the flange of the blade

thing from my sight. The last glimpse I had was of the bloated face,
blood-stained and fixed with a grin of malice which would have held its


I thought and thought what should be my next move, but my brain seemed

waited I heard in the distance a gipsy song sung by merry voices coming
closer, and through their song the rolling of heavy wheels and the
cracking of whips; the Szgany and the Slovaks of whom the Count had

contained the vile body, I ran from the place and gained the Count's
room, determined to rush out at the moment the door should be opened.

key in the great lock and the falling back of the heavy door. There must
have been some other means of entry, or some one had a key for one of

dying away in some passage which sent up a clanging echo. I turned to
run down again towards the vault, where I might find the new entrance;
but at the moment there seemed to come a violent puff of wind, and the

the lintels flying. When I ran to push it open, I found that it was
hopelessly fast. I was again a prisoner, and the net of doom was closing


As I write there is in the passage below a sound of many tramping feet

with their freight of earth. There is a sound of hammering; it is the
box being nailed down. Now I can hear the heavy feet tramping again


The door is shut, and the chains rattle; there is a grinding of the key
in the lock; I can hear the key withdraw: then another door opens and


Hark! in the courtyard and down the rocky way the roll of heavy wheels,
the crack of whips, and the chorus of the Szgany as they pass into the



and there is nought in common. They are devils of the Pit!

I shall not remain alone with them; I shall try to scale the castle wall
farther than I have yet attempted. I shall take some of the gold with


And then away for home! away to the quickest and nearest train! away
from this cursed spot, from this cursed land, where the devil and his


At least God's mercy is better than that of these monsters, and the

Good-bye, all! Mina!











"My dearest Lucy,--


with work. The life of an assistant schoolmistress is sometimes trying.
I am longing to be with you, and by the sea, where we can talk together

lately, because I want to keep up with Jonathan's studies, and I have
been practising shorthand very assiduously. When we are married I shall
be able to be useful to Jonathan, and if I can stenograph well enough I

him on the typewriter, at which also I am practising very hard. He
and I sometimes write letters in shorthand, and he is keeping a

shall keep a diary in the same way. I don't mean one of those
two-pages-to-the-week-with-Sunday-squeezed-in-a-corner diaries, but a

suppose there will be much of interest to other people; but it is not
intended for them. I may show it to Jonathan some day if there is in it

to do what I see lady journalists do: interviewing and writing
descriptions and trying to remember conversations. I am told that, with

said during a day. However, we shall see. I will tell you of my little
plans when we meet. I have just had a few hurried lines from Jonathan
from Transylvania. He is well, and will be returning in about a week. I

countries. I wonder if we--I mean Jonathan and I--shall ever see them
together. There is the ten o'clock bell ringing. Good-bye.





"Tell me all the news when you write. You have not told me anything for




_Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_.







"I must say you tax me _very_ unfairly with being a bad correspondent. I
wrote to you _twice_ since we parted, and your last letter was only your
_second_. Besides, I have nothing to tell you. There is really nothing

to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park. As to the
tall, curly-haired man, I suppose it was the one who was with me at the

Holmwood. He often comes to see us, and he and mamma get on very well
together; they have so many things to talk about in common. We met some

engaged to Jonathan. He is an excellent _parti_, being handsome, well
off, and of good birth. He is a doctor and really clever. Just fancy! He
is only nine-and-twenty, and he has an immense lunatic asylum all under

see us, and often comes now. I think he is one of the most resolute men
I ever saw, and yet the most calm. He seems absolutely imperturbable. I

a curious habit of looking one straight in the face, as if trying to
read one's thoughts. He tries this on very much with me, but I flatter
myself he has got a tough nut to crack. I know that from my glass. Do

a bad study, and gives you more trouble than you can well fancy if you
have never tried it. He says that I afford him a curious psychological

interest in dress to be able to describe the new fashions. Dress is a
bore. That is slang again, but never mind; Arthur says that every day.
There, it is all out. Mina, we have told all our secrets to each other

laughed and cried together; and now, though I have spoken, I would like
to speak more. Oh, Mina, couldn't you guess? I love him. I am blushing

words. But oh, Mina, I love him; I love him; I love him! There, that
does me good. I wish I were with you, dear, sitting by the fire

I do not know how I am writing this even to you. I am afraid to stop,
or I should tear up the letter, and I don't want to stop, for I _do_ so
want to tell you all. Let me hear from you _at once_, and tell me all

prayers; and, Mina, pray for my happiness.













"Thanks, and thanks, and thanks again for your sweet letter. It was so
nice to be able to tell you and to have your sympathy.


Here am I, who shall be twenty in September, and yet I never had a
proposal till to-day, not a real proposal, and to-day I have had three.

really and truly sorry, for two of the poor fellows. Oh, Mina, I am so
happy that I don't know what to do with myself. And three proposals!

getting all sorts of extravagant ideas and imagining themselves injured
and slighted if in their very first day at home they did not get six at
least. Some girls are so vain! You and I, Mina dear, who are engaged and

despise vanity. Well, I must tell you about the three, but you must keep
it a secret, dear, from _every one_, except, of course, Jonathan. You

Arthur. A woman ought to tell her husband everything--don't you think
so, dear?--and I must be fair. Men like women, certainly their wives, to
be quite as fair as they are; and women, I am afraid, are not always

before lunch. I told you of him, Dr. John Seward, the lunatic-asylum
man, with the strong jaw and the good forehead. He was very cool

himself as to all sorts of little things, and remembered them; but he
almost managed to sit down on his silk hat, which men don't generally do

playing with a lancet in a way that made me nearly scream. He spoke to
me, Mina, very straightforwardly. He told me how dear I was to him,
though he had known me so little, and what his life would be with me to

did not care for him, but when he saw me cry he said that he was a brute
and would not add to my present trouble. Then he broke off and asked if

and then with some hesitation he asked me if I cared already for any one
else. He put it very nicely, saying that he did not want to wring my
confidence from me, but only to know, because if a woman's heart was

tell him that there was some one. I only told him that much, and then he
stood up, and he looked very strong and very grave as he took both my

wanted a friend I must count him one of my best. Oh, Mina dear, I can't
help crying: and you must excuse this letter being all blotted. Being
proposed to is all very nice and all that sort of thing, but it isn't at

loves you honestly, going away and looking all broken-hearted, and to
know that, no matter what he may say at the moment, you are passing

miserable, though I am so happy.




off, so I can go on telling you about the day. Well, my dear, number Two
came after lunch. He is such a nice fellow, an American from Texas, and
he looks so young and so fresh that it seems almost impossible that he

with poor Desdemona when she had such a dangerous stream poured in her
ear, even by a black man. I suppose that we women are such cowards that

what I would do if I were a man and wanted to make a girl love me. No, I
don't, for there was Mr. Morris telling us his stories, and Arthur never
told any, and yet---- My dear, I am somewhat previous. Mr. Quincey P.

alone. No, he doesn't, for Arthur tried twice to _make_ a chance, and I
helping him all I could; I am not ashamed to say it now. I must tell you

he never does so to strangers or before them, for he is really well
educated and has exquisite manners--but he found out that it amused me
to hear him talk American slang, and whenever I was present, and there

dear, he has to invent it all, for it fits exactly into whatever else he
has to say. But this is a way slang has. I do not know myself if I shall

heard him use any as yet. Well, Mr. Morris sat down beside me and looked
as happy and jolly as he could, but I could see all the same that he was


"'Miss Lucy, I know I ain't good enough to regulate the fixin's of your
little shoes, but I guess if you wait till you find a man that is you
will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you quit. Won't

together, driving in double harness?'


half so hard to refuse him as it did poor Dr. Seward; so I said, as
lightly as I could, that I did not know anything of hitching, and that I

a light manner, and he hoped that if he had made a mistake in doing so
on so grave, so momentous, an occasion for him, I would forgive him. He
really did look serious when he was saying it, and I couldn't help

flirt--though I couldn't help feeling a sort of exultation that he was
number two in one day. And then, my dear, before I could say a word he

heart and soul at my feet. He looked so earnest over it that I shall
never again think that a man must be playful always, and never earnest,

which checked him, for he suddenly stopped, and said with a sort of
manly fervour that I could have loved him for if I had been free:--

"'Lucy, you are an honest-hearted girl, I know. I should not be here

through to the very depths of your soul. Tell me, like one good fellow
to another, is there any one else that you care for? And if there is

let me, a very faithful friend.'


of them? Here was I almost making fun of this great-hearted, true
gentleman. I burst into tears--I am afraid, my dear, you will think

badly. Why can't they let a girl marry three men, or as many as want
her, and save all this trouble? But this is heresy, and I must not say
it. I am glad to say that, though I was crying, I was able to look into


"'Yes, there is some one I love, though he has not told me yet that he
even loves me.' I was right to speak to him so frankly, for quite a

think I put them into his--and said in a hearty way:--

"'That's my brave girl. It's better worth being late for a chance of

cry, my dear. If it's for me, I'm a hard nut to crack; and I take it
standing up. If that other fellow doesn't know his happiness, well, he'd

your honesty and pluck have made me a friend, and that's rarer than a
lover; it's more unselfish anyhow. My dear, I'm going to have a pretty

It'll be something to keep off the darkness now and then. You can, you
know, if you like, for that other good fellow--he must be a good fellow,
my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken

noble, too, to a rival--wasn't it?--and he so sad; so I leant over and
kissed him. He stood up with my two hands in his, and as he looked down


"'Little girl, I hold your hand, and you've kissed me, and if these
things don't make us friends nothing ever will. Thank you for your sweet

went straight out of the room without looking back, without a tear or a
quiver or a pause; and I am crying like a baby. Oh, why must a man like
that be made unhappy when there are lots of girls about who would

I don't want to be free. My dear, this quite upset me, and I feel I
cannot write of happiness just at once, after telling you of it; and I


"Ever your loving




I? Besides, it was all so confused; it seemed only a moment from his
coming into the room till both his arms were round me, and he was

deserve it. I must only try in the future to show that I am not
ungrateful to God for all His goodness to me in sending to me such a





_Dr. Seward's Diary._




diary instead. Since my rebuff of yesterday I have a sort of empty
feeling; nothing in the world seems of sufficient importance to be worth
the doing.... As I knew that the only cure for this sort of thing was

afforded me a study of much interest. He is so quaint that I am
determined to understand him as well as I can. To-day I seemed to get


I questioned him more fully than I had ever done, with a view to making
myself master of the facts of his hallucination. In my manner of doing

him to the point of his madness--a thing which I avoid with the patients


(_Mem._, under what circumstances would I _not_ avoid the pit of hell?)
_Omnia Romæ venalia sunt._ Hell has its price! _verb. sap._ If there be

_accurately_, so I had better commence to do so, therefore--

R. M. Renfield, ætat 59.--Sanguine temperament; great physical strength;
morbidly excitable; periods of gloom, ending in some fixed idea which I

disturbing influence end in a mentally-accomplished finish; a possibly
dangerous man, probably dangerous if unselfish. In selfish men caution

on this point is, when self is the fixed point the centripetal force is
balanced with the centrifugal; when duty, a cause, etc., is the fixed
point, the latter force is paramount, and only accident or a series of







"My dear Art,--


another's wounds after trying a landing at the Marquesas; and drunk
healths on the shore of Titicaca. There are more yarns to be told, and

this be at my camp-fire to-morrow night? I have no hesitation in asking
you, as I know a certain lady is engaged to a certain dinner-party, and
that you are free. There will only be one other, our old pal at the

weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to
the happiest man in all the wide world, who has won the noblest heart

welcome, and a loving greeting, and a health as true as your own right
hand. We shall both swear to leave you at home if you drink too deep to




"QUINCEY P. MORRIS."






"Count me in every time. I bear messages which will make both your ears









MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL



lovelier than ever, and we drove up to the house at the Crescent in
which they have rooms. This is a lovely place. The little river, the

harbour. A great viaduct runs across, with high piers, through which the
view seems somehow further away than it really is. The valley is

on either side you look right across it, unless you are near enough to
see down. The houses of the old town--the side away from us--are all
red-roofed, and seem piled up one over the other anyhow, like the

Abbey, which was sacked by the Danes, and which is the scene of part of
"Marmion," where the girl was built up in the wall. It is a most noble

a legend that a white lady is seen in one of the windows. Between it and
the town there is another church, the parish one, round which is a big
graveyard, all full of tombstones. This is to my mind the nicest spot in

harbour and all up the bay to where the headland called Kettleness
stretches out into the sea. It descends so steeply over the harbour that

destroyed. In one place part of the stonework of the graves stretches
out over the sandy pathway far below. There are walks, with seats beside

looking at the beautiful view and enjoying the breeze. I shall come and
sit here very often myself and work. Indeed, I am writing now, with my
book on my knee, and listening to the talk of three old men who are



The harbour lies below me, with, on the far side, one long granite wall
stretching out into the sea, with a curve outwards at the end of it, in
the middle of which is a lighthouse. A heavy sea-wall runs along outside

and its end too has a lighthouse. Between the two piers there is a
narrow opening into the harbour, which then suddenly widens.


nothing, and there is merely the stream of the Esk, running between
banks of sand, with rocks here and there. Outside the harbour on this

which runs straight out from behind the south lighthouse. At the end of
it is a buoy with a bell, which swings in bad weather, and sends in a

lost bells are heard out at sea. I must ask the old man about this; he


He is a funny old man. He must be awfully old, for his face is all
gnarled and twisted like the bark of a tree. He tells me that he is

fleet when Waterloo was fought. He is, I am afraid, a very sceptical
person, for when I asked him about the bells at sea and the White Lady


"I wouldn't fash masel' about them, miss. Them things be all wore out.
Mind, I don't say that they never was, but I do say that they wasn't in

but not for a nice young lady like you. Them feet-folks from York and
Leeds that be always eatin' cured herrin's an' drinkin' tea an' lookin'

bothered tellin' lies to them--even the newspapers, which is full of
fool-talk." I thought he would be a good person to learn interesting
things from, so I asked him if he would mind telling me something about

when the clock struck six, whereupon he laboured to get up, and said:--

"I must gang ageeanwards home now, miss. My grand-daughter doesn't like

crammle aboon the grees, for there be a many of 'em; an', miss, I lack


He hobbled away, and I could see him hurrying, as well as he could, down
the steps. The steps are a great feature on the place. They lead from
the town up to the church, there are hundreds of them--I do not know how

a horse could easily walk up and down them. I think they must originally
have had something to do with the abbey. I shall go home too. Lucy went

not go. They will be home by this.



_1 August._--I came up here an hour ago with Lucy, and we had a most
interesting talk with my old friend and the two others who always come

must have been in his time a most dictatorial person. He will not admit
anything, and downfaces everybody. If he can't out-argue them he bullies
them, and then takes their silence for agreement with his views. Lucy

beautiful colour since she has been here. I noticed that the old men did
not lose any time in coming up and sitting near her when we sat down.

on the spot. Even my old man succumbed and did not contradict her, but
gave me double share instead. I got him on the subject of the legends,

and put it down:--


nowt else. These bans an' wafts an' boh-ghosts an' barguests an' bogles
an' all anent them is only fit to set bairns an' dizzy women

an' warnin's, be all invented by parsons an' illsome beuk-bodies an'
railway touters to skeer an' scunner hafflin's, an' to get folks to do
somethin' that they don't other incline to. It makes me ireful to think

an' preachin' them out of pulpits, does want to be cuttin' them on the
tombstones. Look here all around you in what airt ye will; all them

is acant--simply tumblin' down with the weight o' the lies wrote on
them, 'Here lies the body' or 'Sacred to the memory' wrote on all of

the memories of them bean't cared a pinch of snuff about, much less
sacred. Lies all of them, nothin' but lies of one kind or another! My
gog, but it'll be a quare scowderment at the Day of Judgment when they

drag their tombsteans with them to prove how good they was; some of them
trimmlin' and ditherin', with their hands that dozzened an' slippy from


I could see from the old fellow's self-satisfied air and the way in
which he looked round for the approval of his cronies that he was


"Oh, Mr. Swales, you can't be serious. Surely these tombstones are not


"Yabblins! There may be a poorish few not wrong, savin' where they make
out the people too good; for there be folk that do think a balm-bowl be

look you here; you come here a stranger, an' you see this kirk-garth." I
nodded, for I thought it better to assent, though I did not quite

He went on: "And you consate that all these steans be aboon folk that be
happed here, snod an' snog?" I assented again. "Then that be just where
the lie comes in. Why, there be scores of these lay-beds that be toom as

and they all laughed. "And my gog! how could they be otherwise? Look at
that one, the aftest abaft the bier-bank: read it!" I went over and



Andres, April, 1854, æt. 30." When I came back Mr. Swales went on:--

"Who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? Murdered off the coast
of Andres! an' you consated his body lay under! Why, I could name ye a

northwards--"or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the
steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of

the _Lively_ off Greenland in '20; or Andrew Woodhouse, drowned in the
same seas in 1777; or John Paxton, drowned off Cape Farewell a year
later; or old John Rawlings, whose grandfather sailed with me, drowned

to make a rush to Whitby when the trumpet sounds? I have me antherums
aboot it! I tell ye that when they got here they'd be jommlin' an'

in the old days, when we'd be at one another from daylight to dark, an'
tryin' to tie up our cuts by the light of the aurora borealis." This was

cronies joined in with gusto.


assumption that all the poor people, or their spirits, will have to
take their tombstones with them on the Day of Judgment. Do you think


"Well, what else be they tombstones for? Answer me that, miss!"



"To please their relatives, you suppose!" This he said with intense
scorn. "How will it pleasure their relatives to know that lies is wrote

pointed to a stone at our feet which had been laid down as a slab, on
which the seat was rested, close to the edge of the cliff. "Read the

from where I sat, but Lucy was more opposite to them, so she leant over


"Sacred to the memory of George Canon, who died, in the hope of a
glorious resurrection, on July, 29, 1873, falling from the rocks at

beloved son. 'He was the only son of his mother, and she was a widow.'
Really, Mr. Swales, I don't see anything very funny in that!" She spoke


"Ye don't see aught funny! Ha! ha! But that's because ye don't gawm the
sorrowin' mother was a hell-cat that hated him because he was

committed suicide in order that she mightn't get an insurance she put on
his life. He blew nigh the top of his head off with an old musket that

brought the clegs and the dowps to him. That's the way he fell off the
rocks. And, as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, I've often heard him
say masel' that he hoped he'd go to hell, for his mother was so pious

she was. Now isn't that stean at any rate"--he hammered it with his
stick as he spoke--"a pack of lies? and won't it make Gabriel keckle

his hump, and asks it to be took as evidence!"


said, rising up:--


leave it; and now I find I must go on sitting over the grave of a


"That won't harm ye, my pretty; an' it may make poor Geordie gladsome to
have so trim a lass sittin' on his lap. That won't hurt ye. Why, I've

no harm. Don't ye fash about them as lies under ye, or that doesn' lie
there either! It'll be time for ye to be getting scart when ye see the

There's the clock, an' I must gang. My service to ye, ladies!" And off


Lucy and I sat awhile, and it was all so beautiful before us that we
took hands as we sat; and she told me all over again about Arthur and

haven't heard from Jonathan for a whole month.



_The same day._ I came up here alone, for I am very sad. There was no
letter for me. I hope there cannot be anything the matter with Jonathan.

town, sometimes in rows where the streets are, and sometimes singly;
they run right up the Esk and die away in the curve of the valley. To my
left the view is cut off by a black line of roof of the old house next

me, and there is a clatter of a donkey's hoofs up the paved road below.
The band on the pier is playing a harsh waltz in good time, and further

Neither of the bands hears the other, but up here I hear and see them
both. I wonder where Jonathan is and if he is thinking of me! I wish he





_5 June._--The case of Renfield grows more interesting the more I get to
understand the man. He has certain qualities very largely developed;

object of the latter. He seems to have some settled scheme of his own,
but what it is I do not yet know. His redeeming quality is a love of

sometimes imagine he is only abnormally cruel. His pets are of odd
sorts. Just now his hobby is catching flies. He has at present such a

did not break out into a fury, as I expected, but took the matter in
simple seriousness. He thought for a moment, and then said: "May I have

must watch him.



_18 June._--He has turned his mind now to spiders, and has got several

the number of the latter is becoming sensibly diminished, although he
has used half his food in attracting more flies from outside to his




_1 July._--His spiders are now becoming as great a nuisance as his
flies, and to-day I told him that he must get rid of them. He looked

events. He cheerfully acquiesced in this, and I gave him the same time
as before for reduction. He disgusted me much while with him, for when a
horrid blow-fly, bloated with some carrion food, buzzed into the room,

and thumb, and, before I knew what he was going to do, put it in his
mouth and ate it. I scolded him for it, but he argued quietly that it

gave life to him. This gave me an idea, or the rudiment of one. I must
watch how he gets rid of his spiders. He has evidently some deep problem

jotting down something. Whole pages of it are filled with masses of
figures, generally single numbers added up in batches, and then the

account, as the auditors put it.



_8 July._--There is a method in his madness, and the rudimentary idea in
my mind is growing. It will be a whole idea soon, and then, oh,

conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for a few days, so that I
might notice if there were any change. Things remain as they were except

managed to get a sparrow, and has already partially tamed it. His means
of taming is simple, for already the spiders have diminished. Those that
do remain, however, are well fed, for he still brings in the flies by




_19 July._--We are progressing. My friend has now a whole colony of
sparrows, and his flies and spiders are almost obliterated. When I came

very great favour; and as he spoke he fawned on me like a dog. I asked
him what it was, and he said, with a sort of rapture in his voice and


"A kitten, a nice little, sleek playful kitten, that I can play with,

request, for I had noticed how his pets went on increasing in size and
vivacity, but I did not care that his pretty family of tame sparrows

I said I would see about it, and asked him if he would not rather have a
cat than a kitten. His eagerness betrayed him as he answered:--

"Oh, yes, I would like a cat! I only asked for a kitten lest you should

my head, and said that at present I feared it would not be possible, but
that I would see about it. His face fell, and I could see a warning of

killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test him
with his present craving and see how it will work out; then I shall know




_10 p. m._--I have visited him again and found him sitting in a corner
brooding. When I came in he threw himself on his knees before me and

I was firm, however, and told him that he could not have it, whereupon
he went without a word, and sat down, gnawing his fingers, in the corner


       *       *       *       *       *

_20 July._--Visited Renfield very early, before the attendant went his

which he had saved, in the window, and was manifestly beginning his
fly-catching again; and beginning it cheerfully and with a good grace. I

were. He replied, without turning round, that they had all flown away.
There were a few feathers about the room and on his pillow a drop of
blood. I said nothing, but went and told the keeper to report to me if




_11 a. m._--The attendant has just been to me to say that Renfield has
been very sick and has disgorged a whole lot of feathers. "My belief is,
doctor," he said, "that he has eaten his birds, and that he just took




_11 p. m._--I gave Renfield a strong opiate to-night, enough to make
even him sleep, and took away his pocket-book to look at it. The thought

proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall have to
invent a new classification for him, and call him a zoöphagous

can, and he has laid himself out to achieve it in a cumulative way. He
gave many flies to one spider and many spiders to one bird, and then

steps? It would almost be worth while to complete the experiment. It
might be done if there were only a sufficient cause. Men sneered at
vivisection, and yet look at its results to-day! Why not advance science

I even the secret of one such mind--did I hold the key to the fancy of
even one lunatic--I might advance my own branch of science to a pitch

brain-knowledge would be as nothing. If only there were a sufficient
cause! I must not think too much of this, or I may be tempted; a good

exceptional brain, congenitally?


wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. He has
closed the account most accurately, and to-day begun a new record. How


To me it seems only yesterday that my whole life ended with my new hope,
and that truly I began a new record. So it will be until the Great

profit or loss. Oh, Lucy, Lucy, I cannot be angry with you, nor can I be
angry with my friend whose happiness is yours; but I must only wait on


If I only could have as strong a cause as my poor mad friend there--a
good, unselfish cause to make me work--that would be indeed happiness.




_26 July._--I am anxious, and it soothes me to express myself here; it

there is also something about the shorthand symbols that makes it
different from writing. I am unhappy about Lucy and about Jonathan. I

yesterday dear Mr. Hawkins, who is always so kind, sent me a letter from
him. I had written asking him if he had heard, and he said the enclosed
had just been received. It is only a line dated from Castle Dracula,

I do not understand it, and it makes me uneasy. Then, too, Lucy,
although she is so well, has lately taken to her old habit of walking in

that I am to lock the door of our room every night. Mrs. Westenra has
got an idea that sleep-walkers always go out on roofs of houses and

with a despairing cry that echoes all over the place. Poor dear, she is
naturally anxious about Lucy, and she tells me that her husband, Lucy's
father, had the same habit; that he would get up in the night and dress

autumn, and she is already planning out her dresses and how her house is
to be arranged. I sympathise with her, for I do the same, only Jonathan

make both ends meet. Mr. Holmwood--he is the Hon. Arthur Holmwood, only
son of Lord Godalming--is coming up here very shortly--as soon as he can
leave town, for his father is not very well, and I think dear Lucy is

on the churchyard cliff and show him the beauty of Whitby. I daresay it
is the waiting which disturbs her; she will be all right when he




_27 July._--No news from Jonathan. I am getting quite uneasy about him,
though why I should I do not know; but I do wish that he would write, if

am awakened by her moving about the room. Fortunately, the weather is so
hot that she cannot get cold; but still the anxiety and the perpetually
being wakened is beginning to tell on me, and I am getting nervous and

suddenly called to Ring to see his father, who has been taken seriously
ill. Lucy frets at the postponement of seeing him, but it does not touch

rose-pink. She has lost that anæmic look which she had. I pray it will


       *       *       *       *       *


Mr. Hawkins, from whom I have heard. Oh, I do hope he is not ill. He
surely would have written. I look at that last letter of his, but

his writing. There is no mistake of that. Lucy has not walked much in
her sleep the last week, but there is an odd concentration about her
which I do not understand; even in her sleep she seems to be watching



_6 August._--Another three days, and no news. This suspense is getting
dreadful. If I only knew where to write to or where to go to, I should
feel easier; but no one has heard a word of Jonathan since that last

than ever, but is otherwise well. Last night was very threatening, and
the fishermen say that we are in for a storm. I must try to watch it and

hidden in thick clouds, high over Kettleness. Everything is grey--except
the green grass, which seems like emerald amongst it; grey earthy rock;
grey clouds, tinged with the sunburst at the far edge, hang over the

is tumbling in over the shallows and the sandy flats with a roar,
muffled in the sea-mists drifting inland. The horizon is lost in a grey

there is a "brool" over the sea that sounds like some presage of doom.
Dark figures are on the beach here and there, sometimes half shrouded in

racing for home, and rise and dip in the ground swell as they sweep into
the harbour, bending to the scuppers. Here comes old Mr. Swales. He is
making straight for me, and I can see, by the way he lifts his hat, that


I have been quite touched by the change in the poor old man. When he sat


"I want to say something to you, miss." I could see he was not at ease,

fully; so he said, leaving his hand in mine:--

"I'm afraid, my deary, that I must have shocked you by all the wicked

but I didn't mean them, and I want ye to remember that when I'm gone. We
aud folks that be daffled, and with one foot abaft the krok-hooal, don't

an' that's why I've took to makin' light of it, so that I'd cheer up my
own heart a bit. But, Lord love ye, miss, I ain't afraid of dyin', not a
bit; only I don't want to die if I can help it. My time must be nigh at

expect; and I'm so nigh it that the Aud Man is already whettin' his
scythe. Ye see, I can't get out o' the habit of caffin' about it all at
once; the chafts will wag as they be used to. Some day soon the Angel of

deary!"--for he saw that I was crying--"if he should come this very
night I'd not refuse to answer his call. For life be, after all, only a

we can rightly depend on. But I'm content, for it's comin' to me, my
deary, and comin' quick. It may be comin' while we be lookin' and

it loss and wreck, and sore distress, and sad hearts. Look! look!" he
cried suddenly. "There's something in that wind and in the hoast beyont
that sounds, and looks, and tastes, and smells like death. It's in the

comes!" He held up his arms devoutly, and raised his hat. His mouth
moved as though he were praying. After a few minutes' silence, he got

off. It all touched me, and upset me very much.

I was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spy-glass under his

kept looking at a strange ship.


but she's knocking about in the queerest way. She doesn't know her mind
a bit; she seems to see the storm coming, but can't decide whether to

steered mighty strangely, for she doesn't mind the hand on the wheel;
changes about with every puff of wind. We'll hear more of her before







CUTTING FROM "THE DAILYGRAPH," 8 AUGUST








One of the greatest and suddenest storms on record has just been
experienced here, with results both strange and unique. The weather had

August. Saturday evening was as fine as was ever known, and the great
body of holiday-makers laid out yesterday for visits to Mulgrave Woods,

the neighbourhood of Whitby. The steamers _Emma_ and _Scarborough_ made
trips up and down the coast, and there was an unusual amount of
"tripping" both to and from Whitby. The day was unusually fine till the

churchyard, and from that commanding eminence watch the wide sweep of
sea visible to the north and east, called attention to a sudden show of

blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical
language is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coastguard on duty at once

kept watch on weather signs from the East Cliff, foretold in an emphatic
manner the coming of a sudden storm. The approach of sunset was so very
beautiful, so grand in its masses of splendidly-coloured clouds, that

churchyard to enjoy the beauty. Before the sun dipped below the black
mass of Kettleness, standing boldly athwart the western sky, its

purple, pink, green, violet, and all the tints of gold; with here and
there masses not large, but of seemingly absolute blackness, in all

experience was not lost on the painters, and doubtless some of the
sketches of the "Prelude to the Great Storm" will grace the R. A. and R.

there that his "cobble" or his "mule," as they term the different
classes of boats, would remain in the harbour till the storm had passed.
The wind fell away entirely during the evening, and at midnight there

the approach of thunder, affects persons of a sensitive nature. There
were but few lights in sight at sea, for even the coasting steamers,

few fishing-boats were in sight. The only sail noticeable was a foreign
schooner with all sails set, which was seemingly going westwards. The

comment whilst she remained in sight, and efforts were made to signal
her to reduce sail in face of her danger. Before the night shut down she
was seen with sails idly flapping as she gently rolled on the undulating




Shortly before ten o'clock the stillness of the air grew quite
oppressive, and the silence was so marked that the bleating of a sheep

band on the pier, with its lively French air, was like a discord in the
great harmony of nature's silence. A little after midnight came a
strange sound from over the sea, and high overhead the air began to


Then without warning the tempest broke. With a rapidity which, at the

the whole aspect of nature at once became convulsed. The waves rose in
growing fury, each overtopping its fellow, till in a very few minutes

White-crested waves beat madly on the level sands and rushed up the
shelving cliffs; others broke over the piers, and with their spume swept
the lanthorns of the lighthouses which rise from the end of either pier

force that it was with difficulty that even strong men kept their feet,
or clung with grim clasp to the iron stanchions. It was found necessary

fatalities of the night would have been increased manifold. To add to
the difficulties and dangers of the time, masses of sea-fog came

so dank and damp and cold that it needed but little effort of
imagination to think that the spirits of those lost at sea were

a one shuddered as the wreaths of sea-mist swept by. At times the mist
cleared, and the sea for some distance could be seen in the glare of the
lightning, which now came thick and fast, followed by such sudden peals

of the footsteps of the storm.


absorbing interest--the sea, running mountains high, threw skywards with
each wave mighty masses of white foam, which the tempest seemed to

a rag of sail, running madly for shelter before the blast; now and again
the white wings of a storm-tossed sea-bird. On the summit of the East
Cliff the new searchlight was ready for experiment, but had not yet been

the pauses of the inrushing mist swept with it the surface of the sea.
Once or twice its service was most effective, as when a fishing-boat,

of the sheltering light, to avoid the danger of dashing against the
piers. As each boat achieved the safety of the port there was a shout of
joy from the mass of people on shore, a shout which for a moment seemed


Before long the searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner

earlier in the evening. The wind had by this time backed to the east,
and there was a shudder amongst the watchers on the cliff as they
realized the terrible danger in which she now was. Between her and the

to time suffered, and, with the wind blowing from its present quarter,
it would be quite impossible that she should fetch the entrance of the

great that in their troughs the shallows of the shore were almost
visible, and the schooner, with all sails set, was rushing with such

if it was only in hell." Then came another rush of sea-fog, greater than
any hitherto--a mass of dank mist, which seemed to close on all things
like a grey pall, and left available to men only the organ of hearing,

booming of the mighty billows came through the damp oblivion even louder
than before. The rays of the searchlight were kept fixed on the harbour

breathless. The wind suddenly shifted to the north-east, and the remnant
of the sea-fog melted in the blast; and then, _mirabile dictu_, between
the piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed,

gained the safety of the harbour. The searchlight followed her, and a
shudder ran through all who saw her, for lashed to the helm was a

motion of the ship. No other form could be seen on deck at all. A great
awe came on all as they realised that the ship, as if by a miracle, had

all took place more quickly than it takes to write these words. The
schooner paused not, but rushing across the harbour, pitched herself on
that accumulation of sand and gravel washed by many tides and many

Cliff, known locally as Tate Hill Pier.


the sand heap. Every spar, rope, and stay was strained, and some of the
"top-hammer" came crashing down. But, strangest of all, the very instant
the shore was touched, an immense dog sprang up on deck from below, as

on the sand. Making straight for the steep cliff, where the churchyard
hangs over the laneway to the East Pier so steeply that some of the flat

the Whitby vernacular--actually project over where the sustaining cliff
has fallen away, it disappeared in the darkness, which seemed


It so happened that there was no one at the moment on Tate Hill Pier, as
all those whose houses are in close proximity were either in bed or were

side of the harbour, who at once ran down to the little pier, was the
first to climb on board. The men working the searchlight, after scouring
the entrance of the harbour without seeing anything, then turned the

when he came beside the wheel, bent over to examine it, and recoiled at
once as though under some sudden emotion. This seemed to pique general

round from the West Cliff by the Drawbridge to Tate Hill Pier, but your
correspondent is a fairly good runner, and came well ahead of the crowd.
When I arrived, however, I found already assembled on the pier a crowd,

courtesy of the chief boatman, I was, as your correspondent, permitted
to climb on deck, and was one of a small group who saw the dead seaman


It was no wonder that the coastguard was surprised, or even awed, for

by his hands, tied one over the other, to a spoke of the wheel. Between
the inner hand and the wood was a crucifix, the set of beads on which it
was fastened being around both wrists and wheel, and all kept fast by

the flapping and buffeting of the sails had worked through the rudder of
the wheel and dragged him to and fro, so that the cords with which he

state of things, and a doctor--Surgeon J. M. Caffyn, of 33, East Elliot
Place--who came immediately after me, declared, after making
examination, that the man must have been dead for quite two days. In his

paper, which proved to be the addendum to the log. The coastguard said
the man must have tied up his own hands, fastening the knots with his

complications, later on, in the Admiralty Court; for coastguards cannot
claim the salvage which is the right of the first civilian entering on a
derelict. Already, however, the legal tongues are wagging, and one young

completely sacrificed, his property being held in contravention of the
statutes of mortmain, since the tiller, as emblemship, if not proof, of

that the dead steersman has been reverently removed from the place where
he held his honourable watch and ward till death--a steadfastness as
noble as that of the young Casabianca--and placed in the mortuary to



crowds are scattering homeward, and the sky is beginning to redden over
the Yorkshire wolds. I shall send, in time for your next issue, further

harbour in the storm.



_9 August._--The sequel to the strange arrival of the derelict in the

turns out that the schooner is a Russian from Varna, and is called the
_Demeter_. She is almost entirely in ballast of silver sand, with only a

This cargo was consigned to a Whitby solicitor, Mr. S. F. Billington, of
7, The Crescent, who this morning went aboard and formally took

acting for the charter-party, took formal possession of the ship, and
paid all harbour dues, etc. Nothing is talked about here to-day except
the strange coincidence; the officials of the Board of Trade have been

existing regulations. As the matter is to be a "nine days' wonder," they
are evidently determined that there shall be no cause of after

landed when the ship struck, and more than a few of the members of the
S. P. C. A., which is very strong in Whitby, have tried to befriend the

it seems to have disappeared entirely from the town. It may be that it
was frightened and made its way on to the moors, where it is still

possibility, lest later on it should in itself become a danger, for it
is evidently a fierce brute. Early this morning a large dog, a half-bred
mastiff belonging to a coal merchant close to Tate Hill Pier, was found

and manifestly had had a savage opponent, for its throat was torn away,
and its belly was slit open as if with a savage claw.



_Later._--By the kindness of the Board of Trade inspector, I have been

up to within three days, but contained nothing of special interest
except as to facts of missing men. The greatest interest, however, is
with regard to the paper found in the bottle, which was to-day produced

unfold it has not been my lot to come across. As there is no motive for
concealment, I am permitted to use them, and accordingly send you a

supercargo. It almost seems as though the captain had been seized with
some kind of mania before he had got well into blue water, and that

statement must be taken _cum grano_, since I am writing from the
dictation of a clerk of the Russian consul, who kindly translated for





_Varna to Whitby._


accurate note henceforth till we land._



On 6 July we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes of earth.

cook, and myself (captain).



On 11 July at dawn entered Bosphorus. Boarded by Turkish Customs


       *       *       *       *       *

On 12 July through Dardanelles. More Customs officers and flagboat of

quick. Want us off soon. At dark passed into Archipelago.



On 13 July passed Cape Matapan. Crew dissatisfied about something.


       *       *       *       *       *


sailed with me before. Mate could not make out what was wrong; they only
told him there was _something_, and crossed themselves. Mate lost temper
with one of them that day and struck him. Expected fierce quarrel, but




On 16 July mate reported in the morning that one of crew, Petrofsky, was
missing. Could not account for it. Took larboard watch eight bells last

downcast than ever. All said they expected something of the kind, but
would not say more than there was _something_ aboard. Mate getting very


       *       *       *       *       *


an awestruck way confided to me that he thought there was a strange man
aboard the ship. He said that in his watch he had been sheltering

thin man, who was not like any of the crew, come up the companion-way,
and go along the deck forward, and disappear. He followed cautiously,
but when he got to bows found no one, and the hatchways were all closed.

spread. To allay it, I shall to-day search entire ship carefully from


       *       *       *       *       *


evidently thought there was some one in the ship, we would search from
stem to stern. First mate angry; said it was folly, and to yield to such

them out of trouble with a handspike. I let him take the helm, while the
rest began thorough search, all keeping abreast, with lanterns: we left
no corner unsearched. As there were only the big wooden boxes, there

search over, and went back to work cheerfully. First mate scowled, but




_22 July_.--Rough weather last three days, and all hands busy with
sails--no time to be frightened. Men seem to have forgotten their dread.
Mate cheerful again, and all on good terms. Praised men for work in bad


       *       *       *       *       *


and entering on the Bay of Biscay with wild weather ahead, and yet last
night another man lost--disappeared. Like the first, he came off his

robin, asking to have double watch, as they fear to be alone. Mate
angry. Fear there will be some trouble, as either he or the men will do




_28 July_.--Four days in hell, knocking about in a sort of maelstrom,
and the wind a tempest. No sleep for any one. Men all worn out. Hardly
know how to set a watch, since no one fit to go on. Second mate

Wind abating; seas still terrific, but feel them less, as ship is




_29 July_.--Another tragedy. Had single watch to-night, as crew too
tired to double. When morning watch came on deck could find no one

but no one found. Are now without second mate, and crew in a panic. Mate
and I agreed to go armed henceforth and wait for any sign of cause.



_30 July_.--Last night. Rejoiced we are nearing England. Weather fine,
all sails set. Retired worn out; slept soundly; awaked by mate telling

two hands left to work ship.



_1 August_.--Two days of fog, and not a sail sighted. Had hoped when in
the English Channel to be able to signal for help or get in somewhere.

as could not raise them again. We seem to be drifting to some terrible
doom. Mate now more demoralised than either of men. His stronger nature

working stolidly and patiently, with minds made up to worst. They are


       *       *       *       *       *

_2 August, midnight_.--Woke up from few minutes' sleep by hearing a cry,

ran against mate. Tells me heard cry and ran, but no sign of man on
watch. One more gone. Lord, help us! Mate says we must be past Straits

he heard the man cry out. If so we are now off in the North Sea, and
only God can guide us in the fog, which seems to move with us; and God




_3 August_.--At midnight I went to relieve the man at the wheel, and
when I got to it found no one there. The wind was steady, and as we ran
before it there was no yawing. I dared not leave it, so shouted for the

looked wild-eyed and haggard, and I greatly fear his reason has given
way. He came close to me and whispered hoarsely, with his mouth to my

it, now. On the watch last night I saw It, like a man, tall and thin,
and ghastly pale. It was in the bows, and looking out. I crept behind

air." And as he spoke he took his knife and drove it savagely into
space. Then he went on: "But It is here, and I'll find It. It is in the
hold, perhaps in one of those boxes. I'll unscrew them one by one and

lip, he went below. There was springing up a choppy wind, and I could
not leave the helm. I saw him come out on deck again with a tool-chest

raving mad, and it's no use my trying to stop him. He can't hurt those
big boxes: they are invoiced as "clay," and to pull them about is as

write these notes. I can only trust in God and wait till the fog clears.
Then, if I can't steer to any harbour with the wind that is, I shall cut


       *       *       *       *       *

It is nearly all over now. Just as I was beginning to hope that the mate

hold, and work is good for him--there came up the hatchway a sudden,
startled scream, which made my blood run cold, and up on the deck he

his face convulsed with fear. "Save me! save me!" he cried, and then
looked round on the blanket of fog. His horror turned to despair, and in
a steady voice he said: "You had better come too, captain, before it is

from Him, and it is all that is left!" Before I could say a word, or
move forward to seize him, he sprang on the bulwark and deliberately

this madman who had got rid of the men one by one, and now he has
followed them himself. God help me! How am I to account for all these


       *       *       *       *       *

_4 August._--Still fog, which the sunrise cannot pierce. I know there is

below, I dared not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in
the dimness of the night I saw It--Him! God forgive me, but the mate was

sailor in blue water no man can object. But I am captain, and I must not
leave my ship. But I shall baffle this fiend or monster, for I shall tie

them I shall tie that which He--It!--dare not touch; and then, come good
wind or foul, I shall save my soul, and my honour as a captain. I am
growing weaker, and the night is coming on. If He can look me in the

this bottle may be found, and those who find it may understand; if not,
... well, then all men shall know that I have been true to my trust. God

to do his duty....



Of course the verdict was an open one. There is no evidence to adduce;

none to say. The folk here hold almost universally that the captain is
simply a hero, and he is to be given a public funeral. Already it is
arranged that his body is to be taken with a train of boats up the Esk

steps; for he is to be buried in the churchyard on the cliff. The owners
of more than a hundred boats have already given in their names as


No trace has ever been found of the great dog; at which there is much

believe, be adopted by the town. To-morrow will see the funeral; and so
will end this one more "mystery of the sea."




_8 August._--Lucy was very restless all night, and I, too, could not

chimney-pots, it made me shudder. When a sharp puff came it seemed to be
like a distant gun. Strangely enough, Lucy did not wake; but she got up

managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to bed. It
is a very strange thing, this sleep-walking, for as soon as her will is

disappears, and she yields herself almost exactly to the routine of her


Early in the morning we both got up and went down to the harbour to see
if anything had happened in the night. There were very few people about,

grim-looking waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam that
topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the narrow mouth

felt glad that Jonathan was not on the sea last night, but on land. But,
oh, is he on land or sea? Where is he, and how? I am getting fearfully
anxious about him. If I only knew what to do, and could do anything!



_10 August._--The funeral of the poor sea-captain to-day was most

was carried by captains all the way from Tate Hill Pier up to the
churchyard. Lucy came with me, and we went early to our old seat, whilst

again. We had a lovely view, and saw the procession nearly all the way.
The poor fellow was laid to rest quite near our seat so that we stood on
it when the time came and saw everything. Poor Lucy seemed much upset.

her dreaming at night is telling on her. She is quite odd in one thing:
she will not admit to me that there is any cause for restlessness; or if

cause in that poor old Mr. Swales was found dead this morning on our
seat, his neck being broken. He had evidently, as the doctor said,
fallen back in the seat in some sort of fright, for there was a look of

dear old man! Perhaps he had seen Death with his dying eyes! Lucy is so
sweet and sensitive that she feels influences more acutely than other

not much heed, though I am myself very fond of animals. One of the men
who came up here often to look for the boats was followed by his dog.
The dog is always with him. They are both quiet persons, and I never saw

not come to its master, who was on the seat with us, but kept a few
yards off, barking and howling. Its master spoke to it gently, and then

noise. It was in a sort of fury, with its eyes savage, and all its hairs
bristling out like a cat's tail when puss is on the war-path. Finally

took it by the scruff of the neck and half dragged and half threw it on
the tombstone on which the seat is fixed. The moment it touched the
stone the poor thing became quiet and fell all into a tremble. It did

in such a pitiable state of terror that I tried, though without effect,
to comfort it. Lucy was full of pity, too, but she did not attempt to

fear that she is of too super-sensitive a nature to go through the world
without trouble. She will be dreaming of this to-night, I am sure. The
whole agglomeration of things--the ship steered into port by a dead

touching funeral; the dog, now furious and now in terror--will all


I think it will be best for her to go to bed tired out physically, so I
shall take her for a long walk by the cliffs to Robin Hood's Bay and





CHAPTER VIII





had made my diary a duty I should not open it to-night. We had a lovely
walk. Lucy, after a while, was in gay spirits, owing, I think, to some
dear cows who came nosing towards us in a field close to the lighthouse,

except, of course, personal fear, and it seemed to wipe the slate clean
and give us a fresh start. We had a capital "severe tea" at Robin Hood's

the seaweed-covered rocks of the strand. I believe we should have
shocked the "New Woman" with our appetites. Men are more tolerant, bless
them! Then we walked home with some, or rather many, stoppages to rest,

really tired, and we intended to creep off to bed as soon as we could.
The young curate came in, however, and Mrs. Westenra asked him to stay

know it was a hard fight on my part, and I am quite heroic. I think that
some day the bishops must get together and see about breeding up a new

pressed to, and who will know when girls are tired. Lucy is asleep and
breathing softly. She has more colour in her cheeks than usual, and
looks, oh, so sweet. If Mr. Holmwood fell in love with her seeing her

Some of the "New Women" writers will some day start an idea that men and
women should be allowed to see each other asleep before proposing or

accept; she will do the proposing herself. And a nice job she will make
of it, too! There's some consolation in that. I am so happy to-night,
because dear Lucy seems better. I really believe she has turned the

quite happy if I only knew if Jonathan.... God bless and keep him.



_11 August, 3 a. m._--Diary again. No sleep now, so I may as well write.
I am too agitated to sleep. We have had such an adventure, such an

Suddenly I became broad awake, and sat up, with a horrible sense of fear
upon me, and of some feeling of emptiness around me. The room was dark,
so I could not see Lucy's bed; I stole across and felt for her. The bed

door was shut, but not locked, as I had left it. I feared to wake her
mother, who has been more than usually ill lately, so threw on some

struck me that the clothes she wore might give me some clue to her
dreaming intention. Dressing-gown would mean house; dress, outside.

to myself, "she cannot be far, as she is only in her nightdress." I ran
downstairs and looked in the sitting-room. Not there! Then I looked in

chilling my heart. Finally I came to the hall door and found it open. It
was not wide open, but the catch of the lock had not caught. The people
of the house are careful to lock the door every night, so I feared that

might happen; a vague, overmastering fear obscured all details. I took a
big, heavy shawl and ran out. The clock was striking one as I was in the
Crescent, and there was not a soul in sight. I ran along the North

the edge of the West Cliff above the pier I looked across the harbour to
the East Cliff, in the hope or fear--I don't know which--of seeing Lucy

driving clouds, which threw the whole scene into a fleeting diorama of
light and shade as they sailed across. For a moment or two I could see

around it. Then as the cloud passed I could see the ruins of the abbey
coming into view; and as the edge of a narrow band of light as sharp as
a sword-cut moved along, the church and the churchyard became gradually

there, on our favourite seat, the silver light of the moon struck a
half-reclining figure, snowy white. The coming of the cloud was too

immediately; but it seemed to me as though something dark stood behind
the seat where the white figure shone, and bent over it. What it was,

glance, but flew down the steep steps to the pier and along by the
fish-market to the bridge, which was the only way to reach the East

that it was so, for I wanted no witness of poor Lucy's condition. The
time and distance seemed endless, and my knees trembled and my breath
came laboured as I toiled up the endless steps to the abbey. I must have

lead, and as though every joint in my body were rusty. When I got almost
to the top I could see the seat and the white figure, for I was now

was undoubtedly something, long and black, bending over the
half-reclining white figure. I called in fright, "Lucy! Lucy!" and

and red, gleaming eyes. Lucy did not answer, and I ran on to the
entrance of the churchyard. As I entered, the church was between me and

view again the cloud had passed, and the moonlight struck so brilliantly
that I could see Lucy half reclining with her head lying over the back
of the seat. She was quite alone, and there was not a sign of any living



were parted, and she was breathing--not softly as usual with her, but in
long, heavy gasps, as though striving to get her lungs full at every
breath. As I came close, she put up her hand in her sleep and pulled the

there came a little shudder through her, as though she felt the cold. I
flung the warm shawl over her, and drew the edges tight round her neck,

unclad as she was. I feared to wake her all at once, so, in order to
have my hands free that I might help her, I fastened the shawl at her
throat with a big safety-pin; but I must have been clumsy in my anxiety

became quieter, she put her hand to her throat again and moaned. When I
had her carefully wrapped up I put my shoes on her feet and then began

became more and more uneasy in her sleep, moaning and sighing
occasionally. At last, as time was passing fast, and, for many other

till finally she opened her eyes and awoke. She did not seem surprised
to see me, as, of course, she did not realise all at once where she was.
Lucy always wakes prettily, and even at such a time, when her body must

unclad in a churchyard at night, she did not lose her grace. She
trembled a little, and clung to me; when I told her to come at once with

passed along, the gravel hurt my feet, and Lucy noticed me wince. She
stopped and wanted to insist upon my taking my shoes; but I would not.

was a puddle of water, remaining from the storm, I daubed my feet with
mud, using each foot in turn on the other, so that as we went home, no
one, in case we should meet any one, should notice my bare feet.


a man, who seemed not quite sober, passing along a street in front of
us; but we hid in a door till he had disappeared up an opening such as

Scotland. My heart beat so loud all the time that sometimes I thought I
should faint. I was filled with anxiety about Lucy, not only for her
health, lest she should suffer from the exposure, but for her reputation

feet, and had said a prayer of thankfulness together, I tucked her into
bed. Before falling asleep she asked--even implored--me not to say a

hesitated at first to promise; but on thinking of the state of her
mother's health, and how the knowledge of such a thing would fret her,

infallibly would--in case it should leak out, I thought it wiser to do
so. I hope I did right. I have locked the door, and the key is tied to
my wrist, so perhaps I shall not be again disturbed. Lucy is sleeping


       *       *       *       *       *


not to have even changed her side. The adventure of the night does not
seem to have harmed her; on the contrary, it has benefited her, for she

notice that my clumsiness with the safety-pin hurt her. Indeed, it might
have been serious, for the skin of her throat was pierced. I must have
pinched up a piece of loose skin and have transfixed it, for there are

was a drop of blood. When I apologised and was concerned about it, she
laughed and petted me, and said she did not even feel it. Fortunately it


       *       *       *       *       *


sun bright, and there was a cool breeze. We took our lunch to Mulgrave
Woods, Mrs. Westenra driving by the road and Lucy and I walking by the

I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have been had
Jonathan been with me. But there! I must only be patient. In the evening
we strolled in the Casino Terrace, and heard some good music by Spohr

has been for some time, and fell asleep at once. I shall lock the door
and secure the key the same as before, though I do not expect any




_12 August._--My expectations were wrong, for twice during the night I
was wakened by Lucy trying to get out. She seemed, even in her sleep, to

under a sort of protest. I woke with the dawn, and heard the birds
chirping outside of the window. Lucy woke, too, and, I was glad to see,

manner seemed to have come back, and she came and snuggled in beside me
and told me all about Arthur. I told her how anxious I was about

somewhat, for, though sympathy can't alter facts, it can help to make


       *       *       *       *       *

_13 August._--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on my wrist as

still asleep, pointing to the window. I got up quietly, and pulling
aside the blind, looked out. It was brilliant moonlight, and the soft

silent mystery--was beautiful beyond words. Between me and the moonlight
flitted a great bat, coming and going in great whirling circles. Once or

and flitted away across the harbour towards the abbey. When I came back
from the window Lucy had lain down again, and was sleeping peacefully.


       *       *       *       *       *


to have become as much in love with the spot as I am, and it is hard to
get her away from it when it is time to come home for lunch or tea or
dinner. This afternoon she made a funny remark. We were coming home for

stopped to look at the view, as we generally do. The setting sun, low
down in the sky, was just dropping behind Kettleness; the red light was

everything in a beautiful rosy glow. We were silent for a while, and
suddenly Lucy murmured as if to herself:--


expression, coming _apropos_ of nothing, that it quite startled me. I
slewed round a little, so as to see Lucy well without seeming to stare

her face that I could not quite make out; so I said nothing, but
followed her eyes. She appeared to be looking over at our own seat,

for it seemed for an instant as if the stranger had great eyes like
burning flames; but a second look dispelled the illusion. The red

seat, and as the sun dipped there was just sufficient change in the
refraction and reflection to make it appear as if the light moved. I

with a start, but she looked sad all the same; it may have been that she
was thinking of that terrible night up there. We never refer to it; so I
said nothing, and we went home to dinner. Lucy had a headache and went

I walked along the cliffs to the westward, and was full of sweet
sadness, for I was thinking of Jonathan. When coming home--it was then

Crescent was in shadow, everything could be well seen--I threw a glance
up at our window, and saw Lucy's head leaning out. I thought that

waved it. She did not notice or make any movement whatever. Just then,
the moonlight crept round an angle of the building, and the light fell
on the window. There distinctly was Lucy with her head lying up against

by her, seated on the window-sill, was something that looked like a
good-sized bird. I was afraid she might get a chill, so I ran upstairs,

asleep, and breathing heavily; she was holding her hand to her throat,


I did not wake her, but tucked her up warmly; I have taken care that the
door is locked and the window securely fastened.


there is a drawn, haggard look under her eyes which I do not like. I
fear she is fretting about something. I wish I could find out what it




_15 August._--Rose later than usual. Lucy was languid and tired, and
slept on after we had been called. We had a happy surprise at breakfast.

is full of quiet joy, and her mother is glad and sorry at once. Later on
in the day she told me the cause. She is grieved to lose Lucy as her
very own, but she is rejoiced that she is soon to have some one to

her death-warrant. She has not told Lucy, and made me promise secrecy;
her doctor told her that within a few months, at most, she must die, for

almost sure to kill her. Ah, we were wise to keep from her the affair of
the dreadful night of Lucy's sleep-walking.



_17 August._--No diary for two whole days. I have not had the heart to

No news from Jonathan, and Lucy seems to be growing weaker, whilst her
mother's hours are numbering to a close. I do not understand Lucy's
fading away as she is doing. She eats well and sleeps well, and enjoys

she gets weaker and more languid day by day; at night I hear her gasping
as if for air. I keep the key of our door always fastened to my wrist at

window. Last night I found her leaning out when I woke up, and when I
tried to wake her I could not; she was in a faint. When I managed to

painful struggles for breath. When I asked her how she came to be at the
window she shook her head and turned away. I trust her feeling ill may
not be from that unlucky prick of the safety-pin. I looked at her throat

They are still open, and, if anything, larger than before, and the
edges of them are faintly white. They are like little white dots with

doctor seeing about them.



Carter, Paterson & Co., London._





"Herewith please receive invoice of goods sent by Great Northern

on receipt at goods station King's Cross. The house is at present empty,
but enclosed please find keys, all of which are labelled.


consignment, in the partially ruined building forming part of the house
and marked 'A' on rough diagram enclosed. Your agent will easily
recognise the locality, as it is the ancient chapel of the mansion. The

Cross at 4:30 to-morrow afternoon. As our client wishes the delivery
made as soon as possible, we shall be obliged by your having teams ready

destination. In order to obviate any delays possible through any routine
requirements as to payment in your departments, we enclose cheque

Should the charge be less than this amount, you can return balance; if
greater, we shall at once send cheque for difference on hearing from
you. You are to leave the keys on coming away in the main hall of the

means of his duplicate key.


pressing you in all ways to use the utmost expedition.





"SAMUEL F. BILLINGTON & SON."_





"_21 August._




amount of overplus, as shown in receipted account herewith. Goods are
delivered in exact accordance with instructions, and keys left in parcel




"Yours respectfully.






_18 August._--I am happy to-day, and write sitting on the seat in the
churchyard. Lucy is ever so much better. Last night she slept well all

to her cheeks, though she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. If she
were in any way anæmic I could understand it, but she is not. She is in

seems to have passed from her, and she has just reminded me, as if I
needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it was here, on this
very seat, I found her asleep. As she told me she tapped playfully with


"My poor little feet didn't make much noise then! I daresay poor old Mr.

Geordie." As she was in such a communicative humour, I asked her if she
had dreamed at all that night. Before she answered, that sweet, puckered
look came into her forehead, which Arthur--I call him Arthur from her

went on in a half-dreaming kind of way, as if trying to recall it to


"I didn't quite dream; but it all seemed to be real. I only wanted to be
here in this spot--I don't know why, for I was afraid of something--I

through the streets and over the bridge. A fish leaped as I went by, and
I leaned over to look at it, and I heard a lot of dogs howling--the

I went up the steps. Then I had a vague memory of something long and
dark with red eyes, just as we saw in the sunset, and something very
sweet and very bitter all around me at once; and then I seemed sinking

heard there is to drowning men; and then everything seemed passing away
from me; my soul seemed to go out from my body and float about the air.

and then there was a sort of agonising feeling, as if I were in an
earthquake, and I came back and found you shaking my body. I saw you do


Then she began to laugh. It seemed a little uncanny to me, and I

better not to keep her mind on the subject, so we drifted on to other
subjects, and Lucy was like her old self again. When we got home the

rosy. Her mother rejoiced when she saw her, and we all spent a very


       *       *       *       *       *


Jonathan. The dear fellow has been ill; that is why he did not write. I
am not afraid to think it or say it, now that I know. Mr. Hawkins sent
me on the letter, and wrote himself, oh, so kindly. I am to leave in the

and to bring him home. Mr. Hawkins says it would not be a bad thing if
we were to be married out there. I have cried over the good Sister's

Jonathan, and must be next my heart, for he is _in_ my heart. My journey
is all mapped out, and my luggage ready. I am only taking one change of
dress; Lucy will bring my trunk to London and keep it till I send for

to Jonathan, my husband. The letter that he has seen and touched must



_Letter, Sister Agatha, Hospital of St. Joseph and Ste. Mary,




"Dear Madam,--


enough to write, though progressing well, thanks to God and St. Joseph
and Ste. Mary. He has been under our care for nearly six weeks,

and to say that by this post I write for him to Mr. Peter Hawkins,
Exeter, to say, with his dutiful respects, that he is sorry for his

weeks' rest in our sanatorium in the hills, but will then return. He
wishes me to say that he has not sufficient money with him, and that he
would like to pay for his staying here, so that others who need shall









more. He has told me all about you, and that you are shortly to be his
wife. All blessings to you both! He has had some fearful shock--so says

wolves and poison and blood; of ghosts and demons; and I fear to say of
what. Be careful with him always that there may be nothing to excite him

his do not lightly die away. We should have written long ago, but we
knew nothing of his friends, and there was on him nothing that any one
could understand. He came in the train from Klausenburg, and the guard

shouting for a ticket for home. Seeing from his violent demeanour that
he was English, they gave him a ticket for the furthest station on the


"Be assured that he is well cared for. He has won all hearts by his

doubt will in a few weeks be all himself. But be careful of him for
safety's sake. There are, I pray God and St. Joseph and Ste. Mary, many,





_19 August._--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night. About
eight o'clock he began to get excited and sniff about as a dog does when
setting. The attendant was struck by his manner, and knowing my interest

attendant and at times servile; but to-night, the man tells me, he was
quite haughty. Would not condescend to talk with him at all. All he


     "I don't want to talk to you: you don't count now; the Master is at



seized him. If so, we must look out for squalls, for a strong man with
homicidal and religious mania at once might be dangerous. The

attitude to me was the same as that to the attendant; in his sublime
self-feeling the difference between myself and attendant seemed to him
as nothing. It looks like religious mania, and he will soon think that

are too paltry for an Omnipotent Being. How these madmen give themselves
away! The real God taketh heed lest a sparrow fall; but the God created

if men only knew!


greater degree. I did not pretend to be watching him, but I kept strict
observation all the same. All at once that shifty look came into his

the shifty movement of the head and back which asylum attendants come to
know so well. He became quite quiet, and went and sat on the edge of his
bed resignedly, and looked into space with lack-lustre eyes. I thought I

lead him to talk of his pets, a theme which had never failed to excite
his attention. At first he made no reply, but at length said testily:--



"What?" I said. "You don't mean to tell me you don't care about
spiders?" (Spiders at present are his hobby and the note-book is filling


"The bride-maidens rejoice the eyes that wait the coming of the bride;
but when the bride draweth nigh, then the maidens shine not to the eyes


He would not explain himself, but remained obstinately seated on his bed


I am weary to-night and low in spirits. I cannot but think of Lucy, and
how different things might have been. If I don't sleep at once, chloral,

it grow into a habit. No, I shall take none to-night! I have thought of
Lucy, and I shall not dishonour her by mixing the two. If need be,




_Later._--Glad I made the resolution; gladder that I kept to it. I had
lain tossing about, and had heard the clock strike only twice, when the
night-watchman came to me, sent up from the ward, to say that Renfield

too dangerous a person to be roaming about. Those ideas of his might
work out dangerously with strangers. The attendant was waiting for me.

bed, when he had looked through the observation-trap in the door. His
attention was called by the sound of the window being wrenched out. He
ran back and saw his feet disappear through the window, and had at once

The attendant thought it would be more useful to watch where he should
go than to follow him, as he might lose sight of him whilst getting out

the window. I am thin, so, with his aid, I got out, but feet foremost,
and, as we were only a few feet above ground, landed unhurt. The

straight line, so I ran as quickly as I could. As I got through the belt
of trees I saw a white figure scale the high wall which separates our


I ran back at once, told the watchman to get three or four men
immediately and follow me into the grounds of Carfax, in case our friend

dropped down on the other side. I could see Renfield's figure just
disappearing behind the angle of the house, so I ran after him. On the

ironbound oak door of the chapel. He was talking, apparently to some
one, but I was afraid to go near enough to hear what he was saying, lest

bees is nothing to following a naked lunatic, when the fit of escaping
is upon him! After a few minutes, however, I could see that he did not
take note of anything around him, and so ventured to draw nearer to

in. I heard him say:--


reward me, for I shall be faithful. I have worshipped You long and afar
off. Now that You are near, I await Your commands, and You will not pass


He _is_ a selfish old beggar anyhow. He thinks of the loaves and fishes
even when he believes he is in a Real Presence. His manias make a

He is immensely strong, for he was more like a wild beast than a man. I
never saw a lunatic in such a paroxysm of rage before; and I hope I
shall not again. It is a mercy that we have found out his strength and

might have done wild work before he was caged. He is safe now at any
rate. Jack Sheppard himself couldn't get free from the strait-waistcoat

room. His cries are at times awful, but the silences that follow are
more deadly still, for he means murder in every turn and movement.



"I shall be patient, Master. It is coming--coming--coming!"

So I took the hint, and came too. I was too excited to sleep, but this








_Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra._





"I know you will be anxious to hear all that has happened since we
parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, I got to Hull

feel that I can hardly recall anything of the journey, except that I
knew I was coming to Jonathan, and, that as I should have to do some
nursing, I had better get all the sleep I could.... I found my dear one,

of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you was in his
face has vanished. He is only a wreck of himself, and he does not

least, he wants me to believe so, and I shall never ask. He has had some
terrible shock, and I fear it might tax his poor brain if he were to try

tells me that he raved of dreadful things whilst he was off his head. I
wanted her to tell me what they were; but she would only cross herself,
and say she would never tell; that the ravings of the sick were the

them, she should respect her trust. She is a sweet, good soul, and the
next day, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject again,

about, added: 'I can tell you this much, my dear: that it was not about
anything which he has done wrong himself; and you, as his wife to be,
have no cause to be concerned. He has not forgotten you or what he owes

treat of.' I do believe the dear soul thought I might be jealous lest my
poor dear should have fallen in love with any other girl. The idea of

felt a thrill of joy through me when I _knew_ that no other woman was a
cause of trouble. I am now sitting by his bedside, where I can see his


"When he woke he asked me for his coat, as he wanted to get something
from the pocket; I asked Sister Agatha, and she brought all his things.

let me look at it--for I knew then that I might find some clue to his
trouble--but I suppose he must have seen my wish in my eyes, for he sent

Then he called me back, and when I came he had his hand over the
note-book, and he said to me very solemnly:--


never called me by that name since he asked me to marry him--'you know,
dear, my ideas of the trust between husband and wife: there should be no

think of what it is I feel my head spin round, and I do not know if it
was all real or the dreaming of a madman. You know I have had brain
fever, and that is to be mad. The secret is here, and I do not want to

dear, we had decided to be married as soon as the formalities are
complete. 'Are you willing, Wilhelmina, to share my ignorance? Here is

know; unless, indeed, some solemn duty should come upon me to go back to
the bitter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, recorded here.' He fell

have asked Sister Agatha to beg the Superior to let our wedding be this
afternoon, and am waiting her reply....



"She has come and told me that the chaplain of the English mission

after as Jonathan awakes....



"Lucy, the time has come and gone. I feel very solemn, but very, very
happy. Jonathan woke a little after the hour, and all was ready, and he

and strongly. I could hardly speak; my heart was so full that even those
words seemed to choke me. The dear sisters were so kind. Please God, I

I have taken upon me. I must tell you of my wedding present. When the
chaplain and the sisters had left me alone with my husband--oh, Lucy, it
is the first time I have written the words 'my husband'--left me alone

up in white paper, and tied it with a little bit of pale blue ribbon
which was round my neck, and sealed it over the knot with sealing-wax,

to my husband, and told him that I would keep it so, and then it would
be an outward and visible sign for us all our lives that we trusted each
other; that I would never open it unless it were for his own dear sake

Lucy, it was the first time he took _his wife's_ hand, and said that it
was the dearest thing in all the wide world, and that he would go

have said a part of the past, but he cannot think of time yet, and I
shall not wonder if at first he mixes up not only the month, but the


"Well, my dear, what could I say? I could only tell him that I was the

except myself, my life, and my trust, and that with these went my love
and duty for all the days of my life. And, my dear, when he kissed me,

pledge between us....


it is all sweet to me, but because you have been, and are, very dear to
me. It was my privilege to be your friend and guide when you came from

and with the eyes of a very happy wife, whither duty has led me; so that
in your own married life you too may be all happy as I am. My dear,
please Almighty God, your life may be all it promises: a long day of

not wish you no pain, for that can never be; but I do hope you will be
_always_ as happy as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I shall post this at

is waking--I must attend to my husband!






_Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Harker._





"Oceans of love and millions of kisses, and may you soon be in your own

stay with us here. The strong air would soon restore Jonathan; it has
quite restored me. I have an appetite like a cormorant, am full of
life, and sleep well. You will be glad to know that I have quite given

week, that is when I once got into it at night. Arthur says I am getting
fat. By the way, I forgot to tell you that Arthur is here. We have such

together; and I love him more than ever. He _tells_ me that he loves me
more, but I doubt that, for at first he told me that he couldn't love me
more than he did then. But this is nonsense. There he is, calling to me.




"P. S.--Mother sends her love. She seems better, poor dear. "P. P.





_20 August._--The case of Renfield grows even more interesting. He has
now so far quieted that there are spells of cessation from his passion.
For the first week after his attack he was perpetually violent. Then one

himself: "Now I can wait; now I can wait." The attendant came to tell
me, so I ran down at once to have a look at him. He was still in the

from his face, and his eyes had something of their old pleading--I might
almost say, "cringing"--softness. I was satisfied with his present

but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a strange
thing that the patient had humour enough to see their distrust, for,

furtively at them:--



It was soothing, somehow, to the feelings to find myself dissociated
even in the mind of this poor madman from the others; but all the same I

common with him, so that we are, as it were, to stand together; or has
he to gain from me some good so stupendous that my well-being is needful
to him? I must find out later on. To-night he will not speak. Even the

only say: "I don't take any stock in cats. I have more to think of now,


After a while I left him. The attendant tells me that he was quiet
until just before dawn, and that then he began to get uneasy, and at

him so that he swooned into a sort of coma.



... Three nights has the same thing happened--violent all day then quiet
from moonrise to sunrise. I wish I could get some clue to the cause. It

Happy thought! We shall to-night play sane wits against mad ones. He
escaped before without our help; to-night he shall escape with it. We
shall give him a chance, and have the men ready to follow in case they




_23 August._--"The unexpected always happens." How well Disraeli knew
life. Our bird when he found the cage open would not fly, so all our

thing; that the spells of quietness last a reasonable time. We shall in
future be able to ease his bonds for a few hours each day. I have given

when once he is quiet, until an hour before sunrise. The poor soul's
body will enjoy the relief even if his mind cannot appreciate it. Hark!


       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Another night adventure. Renfield artfully waited until the

and flew down the passage. I sent word for the attendants to follow.
Again he went into the grounds of the deserted house, and we found him

he became furious, and had not the attendants seized him in time, he
would have tried to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing
happened. He suddenly redoubled his efforts, and then as suddenly grew

the patient's eye and followed it, but could trace nothing as it looked
into the moonlit sky except a big bat, which was flapping its silent and

seemed to go straight on, as if it knew where it was bound for or had
some intention of its own. The patient grew calmer every instant, and


"You needn't tie me; I shall go quietly!" Without trouble we came back

not forget this night....




_Hillingham, 24 August._--I must imitate Mina, and keep writing things

be. I wish she were with me again, for I feel so unhappy. Last night I
seemed to be dreaming again just as I was at Whitby. Perhaps it is the
change of air, or getting home again. It is all dark and horrid to me,

weak and worn out. When Arthur came to lunch he looked quite grieved
when he saw me, and I hadn't the spirit to try to be cheerful. I wonder



       *       *       *       *       *

_25 August._--Another bad night. Mother did not seem to take to my

worry me. I tried to keep awake, and succeeded for a while; but when the
clock struck twelve it waked me from a doze, so I must have been falling

did not mind it, and as I remember no more, I suppose I must then have
fallen asleep. More bad dreams. I wish I could remember them. This

me. It must be something wrong with my lungs, for I don't seem ever to
get air enough. I shall try to cheer up when Arthur comes, or else I



_Letter, Arthur Holmwood to Dr. Seward._





"I want you to do me a favour. Lucy is ill; that is, she has no special
disease, but she looks awful, and is getting worse every day. I have

disturb the poor lady's mind about her daughter in her present state of
health would be fatal. Mrs. Westenra has confided to me that her doom is
spoken--disease of the heart--though poor Lucy does not know it yet. I

almost distracted when I think of her; to look at her gives me a pang. I
told her I should ask you to see her, and though she demurred at

painful task for you, I know, old friend, but it is for _her_ sake, and
I must not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to come to lunch at

Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity of being
alone with you. I shall come in for tea, and we can go away together; I
am filled with anxiety, and want to consult with you alone as soon as I










by to-night's post to Ring. Wire me if necessary."




"_2 September._



"With regard to Miss Westenra's health I hasten to let you know at once

that I know of. At the same time, I am not by any means satisfied with
her appearance; she is woefully different from what she was when I saw

opportunity of examination such as I should wish; our very friendship
makes a little difficulty which not even medical science or custom can

draw, in a measure, your own conclusions. I shall then say what I have


"I found Miss Westenra in seemingly gay spirits. Her mother was present,
and in a few seconds I made up my mind that she was trying all she knew
to mislead her mother and prevent her from being anxious. I have no

We lunched alone, and as we all exerted ourselves to be cheerful, we
got, as some kind of reward for our labours, some real cheerfulness

me. We went into her boudoir, and till we got there her gaiety remained,
for the servants were coming and going. As soon as the door was closed,
however, the mask fell from her face, and she sank down into a chair

high spirits had failed, I at once took advantage of her reaction to


"'I cannot tell you how I loathe talking about myself.' I reminded her
that a doctor's confidence was sacred, but that you were grievously
anxious about her. She caught on to my meaning at once, and settled that

myself, but all for him!' So I am quite free.


the usual anæmic signs, and by a chance I was actually able to test the
quality of her blood, for in opening a window which was stiff a cord
gave way, and she cut her hand slightly with broken glass. It was a

a few drops of the blood and have analysed them. The qualitative
analysis gives a quite normal condition, and shows, I should infer, in

satisfied that there is no need for anxiety; but as there must be a
cause somewhere, I have come to the conclusion that it must be something

times, and of heavy, lethargic sleep, with dreams that frighten her, but
regarding which she can remember nothing. She says that as a child she
used to walk in her sleep, and that when in Whitby the habit came back,

Miss Murray found her; but she assures me that of late the habit has not
returned. I am in doubt, and so have done the best thing I know of; I

Amsterdam, who knows as much about obscure diseases as any one in the
world. I have asked him to come over, and as you told me that all things
were to be at your charge, I have mentioned to him who you are and your

your wishes, for I am only too proud and happy to do anything I can for
her. Van Helsing would, I know, do anything for me for a personal

wishes. He is a seemingly arbitrary man, but this is because he knows
what he is talking about better than any one else. He is a philosopher

and he has, I believe, an absolutely open mind. This, with an iron
nerve, a temper of the ice-brook, an indomitable resolution,

kindliest and truest heart that beats--these form his equipment for the
noble work that he is doing for mankind--work both in theory and
practice, for his views are as wide as his all-embracing sympathy. I

him. I have asked him to come at once. I shall see Miss Westenra
to-morrow again. She is to meet me at the Stores, so that I may not







_Letter, Abraham Van Helsing, M. D., D. Ph., D. Lit., etc., etc., to Dr.




"My good Friend,--


fortune I can leave just at once, without wrong to any of those who have
trusted me. Were fortune other, then it were bad for those who have

dear. Tell your friend that when that time you suck from my wound so
swiftly the poison of the gangrene from that knife that our other

aids and you call for them than all his great fortune could do. But it
is pleasure added to do for him, your friend; it is to you that I come.
Have then rooms for me at the Great Eastern Hotel, so that I may be near

late on to-morrow, for it is likely that I may have to return here that
night. But if need be I shall come again in three days, and stay longer





_Letter, Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._





"Van Helsing has come and gone. He came on with me to Hillingham, and
found that, by Lucy's discretion, her mother was lunching out, so that

the patient. He is to report to me, and I shall advise you, for of
course I was not present all the time. He is, I fear, much concerned,

trust to me in the matter, he said: 'You must tell him all you think.
Tell him what I think, if you can guess it, if you will. Nay, I am not
jesting. This is no jest, but life and death, perhaps more.' I asked

come back to town, and he was having a cup of tea before starting on his
return to Amsterdam. He would not give me any further clue. You must not

brains are working for her good. He will speak plainly enough when the
time comes, be sure. So I told him I would simply write an account of
our visit, just as if I were doing a descriptive special article for

smuts in London were not quite so bad as they used to be when he was a
student here. I am to get his report to-morrow if he can possibly make


"Well, as to the visit. Lucy was more cheerful than on the day I first

ghastly look that so upset you, and her breathing was normal. She was
very sweet to the professor (as she always is), and tried to make him
feel at ease; though I could see that the poor girl was making a hard

look under his bushy brows that I knew of old. Then he began to chat of
all things except ourselves and diseases and with such an infinite

reality. Then, without any seeming change, he brought the conversation
gently round to his visit, and suavely said:--


much beloved. That is much, my dear, ever were there that which I do not
see. They told me you were down in the spirit, and that you were of a

and went on: 'But you and I shall show them how wrong they are. How can
he'--and he pointed at me with the same look and gesture as that with

particular occasion which he never fails to remind me of--'know anything
of a young ladies? He has his madams to play with, and to bring them
back to happiness, and to those that love them. It is much to do, and,

young ladies! He has no wife nor daughter, and the young do not tell
themselves to the young, but to the old, like me, who have known so many

smoke the cigarette in the garden, whiles you and I have little talk all
to ourselves.' I took the hint, and strolled about, and presently the
professor came to the window and called me in. He looked grave, but

cause. With you I agree that there has been much blood lost; it has
been, but is not. But the conditions of her are in no way anæmic. I have

that so I may not chance to miss nothing. I know well what she will say.
And yet there is cause; there is always cause for everything. I must go
back home and think. You must send to me the telegram every day; and if

is a disease--interest me, and the sweet young dear, she interest me
too. She charm me, and for her, if not for you or disease, I come.'


And so now, Art, you know all I know. I shall keep stern watch. I trust
your poor father is rallying. It must be a terrible thing to you, my

are both so dear to you. I know your idea of duty to your father, and
you are right to stick to it; but, if need be, I shall send you word to
come at once to Lucy; so do not be over-anxious unless you hear from





_4 September._--Zoöphagous patient still keeps up our interest in him.

before the stroke of noon he began to grow restless. The attendant knew
the symptoms, and at once summoned aid. Fortunately the men came at a

violent that it took all their strength to hold him. In about five
minutes, however, he began to get more and more quiet, and finally sank
into a sort of melancholy, in which state he has remained up to now. The

appalling; I found my hands full when I got in, attending to some of the
other patients who were frightened by him. Indeed, I can quite

some distance away. It is now after the dinner-hour of the asylum, and
as yet my patient sits in a corner brooding, with a dull, sullen,

something directly. I cannot quite understand it.



_Later._--Another change in my patient. At five o'clock I looked in on
him, and found him seemingly as happy and contented as he used to be. He
was catching flies and eating them, and was keeping note of his capture

padding. When he saw me, he came over and apologised for his bad
conduct, and asked me in a very humble, cringing way to be led back to

humour him: so he is back in his room with the window open. He has the
sugar of his tea spread out on the window-sill, and is reaping quite a

box, as of old, and is already examining the corners of his room to find
a spider. I tried to get him to talk about the past few days, for any

rise. For a moment or two he looked very sad, and said in a sort of
far-away voice, as though saying it rather to himself than to me:--

"All over! all over! He has deserted me. No hope for me now unless I do

"Doctor, won't you be very good to me and let me have a little more


"And the flies?" I said.


it." And there are people who know so little as to think that madmen do
not argue. I procured him a double supply, and left him as happy a man


       *       *       *       *       *

_Midnight._--Another change in him. I had been to see Miss Westenra,

own gate looking at the sunset, when once more I heard him yelling. As
his room is on this side of the house, I could hear it better than in

beauty of a sunset over London, with its lurid lights and inky shadows
and all the marvellous tints that come on foul clouds even as on foul

building, with its wealth of breathing misery, and my own desolate heart
to endure it all. I reached him just as the sun was going down, and from
his window saw the red disc sink. As it sank he became less and less

inert mass, on the floor. It is wonderful, however, what intellectual
recuperative power lunatics have, for within a few minutes he stood up

hold him, for I was anxious to see what he would do. He went straight
over to the window and brushed out the crumbs of sugar; then he took his
fly-box, and emptied it outside, and threw away the box; then he shut

me, so I asked him: "Are you not going to keep flies any more?"

"No," said he; "I am sick of all that rubbish!" He certainly is a

mind or of the cause of his sudden passion. Stop; there may be a clue
after all, if we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon

periods which affects certain natures--as at times the moon does others?



_Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._




_Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._

"_5 September._--Patient greatly improved. Good appetite; sleeps



_Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._


lose an hour. I hold over telegram to Holmwood till have seen you."







_Letter, Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._





"My news to-day is not so good. Lucy this morning had gone back a bit.

Westenra was naturally anxious concerning Lucy, and has consulted me
professionally about her. I took advantage of the opportunity, and told

stay with me, and that I would put her in his charge conjointly with
myself; so now we can come and go without alarming her unduly, for a

condition, might be disastrous to her. We are hedged in with
difficulties, all of us, my poor old fellow; but, please God, we shall

do not hear from me, take it for granted that I am simply waiting for




"JOHN SEWARD."




_7 September._--The first thing Van Helsing said to me when we met at




"No," I said. "I waited till I had seen you, as I said in my telegram. I
wrote him a letter simply telling him that you were coming, as Miss
Westenra was not so well, and that I should let him know if need be."


perhaps he shall never know. I pray so; but if it be needed, then he
shall know all. And, my good friend John, let me caution you. You deal

as you deal discreetly with your madmen, so deal with God's madmen,
too--the rest of the world. You tell not your madmen what you do nor why
you do it; you tell them not what you think. So you shall keep knowledge

and breed. You and I shall keep as yet what we know here, and here." He
touched me on the heart and on the forehead, and then touched himself

unfold to you."


decision." He stopped and looked at me, and said:--


ripened--while the milk of its mother-earth is in him, and the sunshine
has not yet begun to paint him with his gold, the husbandman he pull the
ear and rub him between his rough hands, and blow away the green chaff,

time comes.'" I did not see the application, and told him so. For reply
he reached over and took my ear in his hand and pulled it playfully, as

you so then because he knows, but not till then. But you do not find the
good husbandman dig up his planted corn to see if he grow; that is for
the children who play at husbandry, and not for those who take it as of

and Nature has her work to do in making it sprout; if he sprout at all,
there's some promise; and I wait till the ear begins to swell." He broke

gravely:--


full than the rest. You were only student then; now you are master, and
I trust that good habit have not fail. Remember, my friend, that

Even if you have not kept the good practise, let me tell you that this
case of our dear miss is one that may be--mind, I say _may be_--of such

beam, as your peoples say. Take then good note of it. Nothing is too
small. I counsel you, put down in record even your doubts and surmises.
Hereafter it may be of interest to you to see how true you guess. We


When I described Lucy's symptoms--the same as before, but infinitely

bag in which were many instruments and drugs, "the ghastly paraphernalia
of our beneficial trade," as he once called, in one of his lectures, the
equipment of a professor of the healing craft. When we were shown in,

expected to find her. Nature in one of her beneficent moods has ordained
that even death has some antidote to its own terrors. Here, in a case

cause or other, the things not personal--even the terrible change in her
daughter to whom she is so attached--do not seem to reach her. It is

envelope of some insensitive tissue which can protect from evil that
which it would otherwise harm by contact. If this be an ordered
selfishness, then we should pause before we condemn any one for the vice



I used my knowledge of this phase of spiritual pathology, and laid down
a rule that she should not be present with Lucy or think of her illness
more than was absolutely required. She assented readily, so readily that

shown up to Lucy's room. If I was shocked when I saw her yesterday, I
was horrified when I saw her to-day. She was ghastly, chalkily pale; the

her face stood out prominently; her breathing was painful to see or
hear. Van Helsing's face grew set as marble, and his eyebrows converged

seem to have strength to speak, so for a while we were all silent. Then
Van Helsing beckoned to me, and we went gently out of the room. The
instant we had closed the door he stepped quickly along the passage to

closed the door. "My God!" he said; "this is dreadful. There is no time
to be lost. She will die for sheer want of blood to keep the heart's

it you or me?"



"Then get ready at once. I will bring up my bag. I am prepared."

I went downstairs with him, and as we were going there was a knock at

door, and Arthur was stepping quickly in. He rushed up to me, saying in


"Jack, I was so anxious. I read between the lines of your letter, and
have been in an agony. The dad was better, so I ran down here to see for

sir, for coming." When first the Professor's eye had lit upon him he had
been angry at his interruption at such a time; but now, as he took in

seemed to emanate from him, his eyes gleamed. Without a pause he said to
him gravely as he held out his hand:--


bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do not go like that." For he
suddenly grew pale and sat down in a chair almost fainting. "You are to




life is hers, and I would give the last drop of blood in my body for
her." The Professor has a strongly humorous side, and I could from old


"My young sir, I do not ask so much as that--not the last!"


quivered with intent. Van Helsing slapped him on the shoulder. "Come!"
he said. "You are a man, and it is a man we want. You are better than
me, better than my friend John." Arthur looked bewildered, and the


"Young miss is bad, very bad. She wants blood, and blood she must have
or die. My friend John and I have consulted; and we are about to perform

the empty veins which pine for him. John was to give his blood, as he is
the more young and strong than me"--here Arthur took my hand and wrung

old or young, who toil much in the world of thought. Our nerves are not
so calm and our blood not so bright than yours!" Arthur turned to him


"If you only knew how gladly I would die for her you would




"Good boy!" said Van Helsing. "In the not-so-far-off you will be happy
that you have done all for her you love. Come now and be silent. You

must leave at my sign. Say no word to Madame; you know how it is with
her! There must be no shock; any knowledge of this would be one. Come!"


Lucy turned her head and looked at us, but said nothing. She was not
asleep, but she was simply too weak to make the effort. Her eyes spoke
to us; that was all. Van Helsing took some things from his bag and laid

coming over to the bed, said cheerily:--


child. See, I lift you so that to swallow is easy. Yes." She had made


It astonished me how long the drug took to act. This, in fact, marked
the extent of her weakness. The time seemed endless until sleep began to

its potency; and she fell into a deep sleep. When the Professor was
satisfied he called Arthur into the room, and bade him strip off his

over the table. Friend John, help to me!" So neither of us looked whilst


Van Helsing turning to me, said:


defibrinate it."


operation. As the transfusion went on something like life seemed to come
back to poor Lucy's cheeks, and through Arthur's growing pallor the joy

anxious, for the loss of blood was telling on Arthur, strong man as he
was. It gave me an idea of what a terrible strain Lucy's system must
have undergone that what weakened Arthur only partially restored her.

his eyes fixed now on the patient and now on Arthur. I could hear my own
heart beat. Presently he said in a soft voice: "Do not stir an instant.

could see how much Arthur was weakened. I dressed the wound and took his
arm to bring him away, when Van Helsing spoke without turning round--the


"The brave lover, I think, deserve another kiss, which he shall have
presently." And as he had now finished his operation, he adjusted the

which she seems always to wear round her throat, buckled with an old
diamond buckle which her lover had given her, was dragged a little up,
and showed a red mark on her throat. Arthur did not notice it, but I

ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the moment, but turned to
me, saying: "Now take down our brave young lover, give him of the port

much and eat much, that he may be recruited of what he has so given to
his love. He must not stay here. Hold! a moment. I may take it, sir,
that you are anxious of result. Then bring it with you that in all ways

can go home and rest easy in mind that all that can be is. I shall tell
her all when she is well; she shall love you none the less for what you


When Arthur had gone I went back to the room. Lucy was sleeping gently,

breast heaved. By the bedside sat Van Helsing, looking at her intently.
The velvet band again covered the red mark. I asked the Professor in a




"What do you make of it?"


to loose the band. Just over the external jugular vein there were two
punctures, not large, but not wholesome-looking. There was no sign of

trituration. It at once occurred to me that this wound, or whatever it
was, might be the means of that manifest loss of blood; but I abandoned
the idea as soon as formed, for such a thing could not be. The whole bed

have lost to leave such a pallor as she had before the transfusion.



"Well," said I, "I can make nothing of it." The Professor stood up. "I
must go back to Amsterdam to-night," he said. "There are books and

must not let your sight pass from her."



"We are the best nurses, you and I. You keep watch all night; see that
she is well fed, and that nothing disturbs her. You must not sleep all

possible. And then we may begin."



"We shall see!" he answered, as he hurried out. He came back a moment
later and put his head inside the door and said with warning finger held



shall not sleep easy hereafter!"




_8 September._--I sat up all night with Lucy. The opiate worked itself

from what she had been before the operation. Her spirits even were good,
and she was full of a happy vivacity, but I could see evidences of the
absolute prostration which she had undergone. When I told Mrs. Westenra

almost pooh-poohed the idea, pointing out her daughter's renewed
strength and excellent spirits. I was firm, however, and made

night I came in, having in the meantime had supper, and took a seat by
the bedside. She did not in any way make objection, but looked at me

sinking off to sleep, but with an effort seemed to pull herself together
and shook it off. This was repeated several times, with greater effort
and with shorter pauses as the time moved on. It was apparent that she




"No; I am afraid."



"Ah, not if you were like me--if sleep was to you a presage of horror!"

"A presage of horror! What on earth do you mean?"


this weakness comes to me in sleep; until I dread the very thought."

"But, my dear girl, you may sleep to-night. I am here watching you, and


"Ah, I can trust you!" I seized the opportunity, and said: "I promise
you that if I see any evidence of bad dreams I will wake you at once."


sleep!" And almost at the word she gave a deep sigh of relief, and sank


All night long I watched by her. She never stirred, but slept on and on
in a deep, tranquil, life-giving, health-giving sleep. Her lips were

pendulum. There was a smile on her face, and it was evident that no bad


In the early morning her maid came, and I left her in her care and took
myself back home, for I was anxious about many things. I sent a short
wire to Van Helsing and to Arthur, telling them of the excellent result

day to clear off; it was dark when I was able to inquire about my
zoöphagous patient. The report was good; he had been quite quiet for the

I was at dinner, suggesting that I should be at Hillingham to-night, as
it might be well to be at hand, and stating that he was leaving by the


       *       *       *       *       *


Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly had a wink of sleep, and my
brain was beginning to feel that numbness which marks cerebral

with me she looked sharply in my face and said:--

"No sitting up to-night for you. You are worn out. I am quite well

will sit up with you." I would not argue the point, but went and had my
supper. Lucy came with me, and, enlivened by her charming presence, I

excellent port. Then Lucy took me upstairs, and showed me a room next
her own, where a cozy fire was burning. "Now," she said, "you must stay
here. I shall leave this door open and my door too. You can lie on the

bed whilst there is a patient above the horizon. If I want anything I
shall call out, and you can come to me at once." I could not but

So, on her renewing her promise to call me if she should want anything,
I lay on the sofa, and forgot all about everything.




_9 September._--I feel so happy to-night. I have been so miserably weak,

a long spell of east wind out of a steel sky. Somehow Arthur feels very,
very close to me. I seem to feel his presence warm about me. I suppose

eyes and sympathy on ourselves, whilst health and strength give Love
rein, and in thought and feeling he can wander where he wills. I know
where my thoughts are. If Arthur only knew! My dear, my dear, your ears

last night! How I slept, with that dear, good Dr. Seward watching me.
And to-night I shall not fear to sleep, since he is close at hand and




_Dr. Seward's Diary._


started awake all in a second. That is one of the things that we learn


"And how is our patient?"



"Come, let us see," he said. And together we went into the room.

The blind was down, and I went over to raise it gently, whilst Van


As I raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flooded the room, I
heard the Professor's low hiss of inspiration, and knowing its rarity, a

his exclamation of horror, "Gott in Himmel!" needed no enforcement from
his agonised face. He raised his hand and pointed to the bed, and his
iron face was drawn and ashen white. I felt my knees begin to tremble.


white and wan-looking than ever. Even the lips were white, and the gums
seemed to have shrunken back from the teeth, as we sometimes see in a

in anger, but the instinct of his life and all the long years of habit
stood to him, and he put it down again softly. "Quick!" he said. "Bring
the brandy." I flew to the dining-room, and returned with the decanter.

wrist and heart. He felt her heart, and after a few moments of agonising


"It is not too late. It beats, though but feebly. All our work is
undone; we must begin again. There is no young Arthur here now; I have

dipping into his bag and producing the instruments for transfusion; I
had taken off my coat and rolled up my shirt-sleeve. There was no

without a moment's delay, we began the operation. After a time--it did
not seem a short time either, for the draining away of one's blood, no

held up a warning finger. "Do not stir," he said, "but I fear that with
growing strength she may wake; and that would make danger, oh, so much
danger. But I shall precaution take. I shall give hypodermic injection

intent. The effect on Lucy was not bad, for the faint seemed to merge
subtly into the narcotic sleep. It was with a feeling of personal pride

cheeks and lips. No man knows, till he experiences it, what it is to
feel his own life-blood drawn away into the veins of the woman he loves.

The Professor watched me critically. "That will do," he said. "Already?"

smiled a sad sort of smile as he replied:--


and for others; and the present will suffice."

When we stopped the operation, he attended to Lucy, whilst I applied

leisure to attend to me, for I felt faint and a little sick. By-and-by
he bound up my wound, and sent me downstairs to get a glass of wine for



"Mind, nothing must be said of this. If our young lover should turn up
unexpected, as before, no word to him. It would at once frighten him and


When I came back he looked at me carefully, and then said:--

"You are not much the worse. Go into the room, and lie on your sofa, and


I followed out his orders, for I knew how right and wise they were. I
had done my part, and now my next duty was to keep up my strength. I

what had occurred. I fell asleep on the sofa, however, wondering over
and over again how Lucy had made such a retrograde movement, and how
she could have been drained of so much blood with no sign anywhere to

sleeping and waking, my thoughts always came back to the little
punctures in her throat and the ragged, exhausted appearance of their


Lucy slept well into the day, and when she woke she was fairly well and

had seen her, he went out for a walk, leaving me in charge, with strict
injunctions that I was not to leave her for a moment. I could hear his


Lucy chatted with me freely, and seemed quite unconscious that anything
had happened. I tried to keep her amused and interested. When her mother
came up to see her, she did not seem to notice any change whatever, but


"We owe you so much, Dr. Seward, for all you have done, but you really

yourself. You want a wife to nurse and look after you a bit; that you
do!" As she spoke, Lucy turned crimson, though it was only momentarily,

drain to the head. The reaction came in excessive pallor as she turned
imploring eyes on me. I smiled and nodded, and laid my finger on my


Van Helsing returned in a couple of hours, and presently said to me:
"Now you go home, and eat much and drink enough. Make yourself strong. I

I must watch the case, and we must have none other to know. I have grave
reasons. No, do not ask them; think what you will. Do not fear to think


In the hall two of the maids came to me, and asked if they or either of
them might not sit up with Miss Lucy. They implored me to let them; and

up, they asked me quite piteously to intercede with the "foreign
gentleman." I was much touched by their kindness. Perhaps it is because
I am weak at present, and perhaps because it was on Lucy's account, that

similar instances of woman's kindness. I got back here in time for a
late dinner; went my rounds--all well; and set this down whilst waiting




_11 September._--This afternoon I went over to Hillingham. Found Van
Helsing in excellent spirits, and Lucy much better. Shortly after I had

with much impressment--assumed, of course--and showed a great bundle of


"These are for you, Miss Lucy," he said.



"Yes, my dear, but not for you to play with. These are medicines." Here

in nauseous form, so you need not snub that so charming nose, or I shall
point out to my friend Arthur what woes he may have to endure in seeing
so much beauty that he so loves so much distort. Aha, my pretty miss,

you do not know how. I put him in your window, I make pretty wreath, and
hang him round your neck, so that you sleep well. Oh yes! they, like the

of Lethe, and of that fountain of youth that the Conquistadores sought
for in the Floridas, and find him all too late."


them. Now she threw them down, saying, with half-laughter, and


"Oh, Professor, I believe you are only putting up a joke on me. Why,


To my surprise, Van Helsing rose up and said with all his sternness, his
iron jaw set and his bushy eyebrows meeting:--


and I warn you that you do not thwart me. Take care, for the sake of
others if not for your own." Then seeing poor Lucy scared, as she might

me. I only do for your good; but there is much virtue to you in those so
common flowers. See, I place them myself in your room. I make myself the
wreath that you are to wear. But hush! no telling to others that make so

and obedience is to bring you strong and well into loving arms that wait
for you. Now sit still awhile. Come with me, friend John, and you shall

where my friend Vanderpool raise herb in his glass-houses all the year.
I had to telegraph yesterday, or they would not have been here."

We went into the room, taking the flowers with us. The Professor's

that I ever heard of. First he fastened up the windows and latched them
securely; next, taking a handful of the flowers, he rubbed them all over

in would be laden with the garlic smell. Then with the wisp he rubbed
all over the jamb of the door, above, below, and at each side, and round

presently I said:--


this certainly puzzles me. It is well we have no sceptic here, or he
would say that you were working some spell to keep out an evil spirit."

"Perhaps I am!" he answered quietly as he began to make the wreath which


We then waited whilst Lucy made her toilet for the night, and when she

neck. The last words he said to her were:--


not to-night open the window or the door."

"I promise," said Lucy, "and thank you both a thousand times for all



As we left the house in my fly, which was waiting, Van Helsing said:--

"To-night I can sleep in peace, and sleep I want--two nights of travel,

and a night to sit up, without to wink. To-morrow in the morning early
you call for me, and we come together to see our pretty miss, so much


He seemed so confident that I, remembering my own confidence two nights
before and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must
have been my weakness that made me hesitate to tell it to my friend, but










_12 September._--How good they all are to me. I quite love that dear Dr.
Van Helsing. I wonder why he was so anxious about these flowers. He
positively frightened me, he was so fierce. And yet he must have been

being alone to-night, and I can go to sleep without fear. I shall not
mind any flapping outside the window. Oh, the terrible struggle that I

or the pain of the fear of sleep, with such unknown horrors as it has
for me! How blessed are some people, whose lives have no fears, no

nothing but sweet dreams. Well, here I am to-night, hoping for sleep,
and lying like Ophelia in the play, with "virgin crants and maiden
strewments." I never liked garlic before, but to-night it is delightful!




_Dr. Seward's Diary._


up to time. The carriage ordered from the hotel was waiting. The
Professor took his bag, which he always brings with him now.


eight o'clock. It was a lovely morning; the bright sunshine and all the
fresh feeling of early autumn seemed like the completion of nature's

but had not yet begun to drop from the trees. When we entered we met
Mrs. Westenra coming out of the morning room. She is always an early


"You will be glad to know that Lucy is better. The dear child is still
asleep. I looked into her room and saw her, but did not go in, lest I

rubbed his hands together, and said:--


which she answered:--


morning is due in part to me."



"Well, I was anxious about the dear child in the night, and went into
her room. She was sleeping soundly--so soundly that even my coming did

horrible, strong-smelling flowers about everywhere, and she had actually
a bunch of them round her neck. I feared that the heavy odour would be
too much for the dear child in her weak state, so I took them all away

pleased with her, I am sure."


she had spoken, I watched the Professor's face, and saw it turn ashen
grey. He had been able to retain his self-command whilst the poor lady

he actually smiled on her as he held open the door for her to pass into
her room. But the instant she had disappeared he pulled me, suddenly and


Then, for the first time in my life, I saw Van Helsing break down. He
raised his hands over his head in a sort of mute despair, and then beat
his palms together in a helpless way; finally he sat down on a chair,

that seemed to come from the very racking of his heart. Then he raised
his arms again, as though appealing to the whole universe. "God! God!

we are so sore beset? Is there fate amongst us still, sent down from the
pagan world of old, that such things must be, and in such way? This poor
mother, all unknowing, and all for the best as she think, does such

must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. Oh, how we are
beset! How are all the powers of the devils against us!" Suddenly he

or no devils, or all the devils at once, it matters not; we fight him
all the same." He went to the hall-door for his bag; and together we


Once again I drew up the blind, whilst Van Helsing went towards the bed.

awful, waxen pallor as before. He wore a look of stern sadness and


"As I expected," he murmured, with that hissing inspiration of his which
meant so much. Without a word he went and locked the door, and then

operation of transfusion of blood. I had long ago recognised the
necessity, and begun to take off my coat, but he stopped me with a

You are weakened already." As he spoke he took off his coat and rolled


Again the operation; again the narcotic; again some return of colour to
the ashy cheeks, and the regular breathing of healthy sleep. This time I


Presently he took an opportunity of telling Mrs. Westenra that she must
not remove anything from Lucy's room without consulting him; that the

was a part of the system of cure. Then he took over the care of the case
himself, saying that he would watch this night and the next and would


After another hour Lucy waked from her sleep, fresh and bright and


What does it all mean? I am beginning to wonder if my long habit of life
amongst the insane is beginning to tell upon my own brain.




_17 September._--Four days and nights of peace. I am getting so strong

long nightmare, and had just awakened to see the beautiful sunshine and
feel the fresh air of the morning around me. I have a dim

in which there was not even the pain of hope to make present distress
more poignant: and then long spells of oblivion, and the rising back to
life as a diver coming up through a great press of water. Since,

to have passed away; the noises that used to frighten me out of my
wits--the flapping against the windows, the distant voices which seemed

commanded me to do I know not what--have all ceased. I go to bed now
without any fear of sleep. I do not even try to keep awake. I have grown

Haarlem. To-night Dr. Van Helsing is going away, as he has to be for a
day in Amsterdam. But I need not be watched; I am well enough to be left
alone. Thank God for mother's sake, and dear Arthur's, and for all our

last night Dr. Van Helsing slept in his chair a lot of the time. I found
him asleep twice when I awoke; but I did not fear to go to sleep again,

the window-panes.








         _Interview with the Keeper in the Zoölogical Gardens._


the words "Pall Mall Gazette" as a sort of talisman, I managed to find
the keeper of the section of the Zoölogical Gardens in which the wolf

the enclosure behind the elephant-house, and was just sitting down to
his tea when I found him. Thomas and his wife are hospitable folk,
elderly, and without children, and if the specimen I enjoyed of their

comfortable. The keeper would not enter on what he called "business"
until the supper was over, and we were all satisfied. Then when the


"Now, sir, you can go on and arsk me what you want. You'll excoose me

wolves and the jackals and the hyenas in all our section their tea afore
I begins to arsk them questions."


into a talkative humour.


their hears is another, when gents as is flush wants a bit of a show-orf
to their gals. I don't so much mind the fust--the 'ittin' with a pole

sherry and kawffee, so to speak, afore I tries on with the
ear-scratchin'. Mind you," he added philosophically, "there's a deal of

arskin' of me questions about my business, and I that grumpy-like that
only for your bloomin' 'arf-quid I'd 'a' seen you blowed fust 'fore I'd

arsk the Superintendent if you might arsk me questions. Without offence
did I tell yer to go to 'ell?"




was 'ittin' me over the 'ead; but the 'arf-quid made that all right. I
weren't a-goin' to fight, so I waited for the food, and did with my 'owl
as the wolves, and lions, and tigers does. But, Lor' love yer 'art, now

me out with her bloomin' old teapot, and I've lit hup, you may scratch
my ears for all you're worth, and won't git even a growl out of me.



"Exactly. I want you to give me your view of it. Just tell me how it
happened; and when I know the facts I'll get you to say what you
consider was the cause of it, and how you think the whole affair will



what we called Bersicker was one of three grey ones that came from
Norway to Jamrach's, which we bought off him four years ago. He was a

surprised at 'im for wantin' to get out nor any other animile in the
place. But, there, you can't trust wolves no more nor women."


got mindin' the animiles so long that blest if he ain't like a old wolf
'isself! But there ain't no 'arm in 'im."


hear my disturbance. I was makin' up a litter in the monkey-house for a
young puma which is ill; but when I heard the yelpin' and 'owlin' I kem

bars as if he wanted to get out. There wasn't much people about that
day, and close at hand was only one man, a tall, thin chap, with a 'ook
nose and a pointed beard, with a few white hairs runnin' through it. He

for it seemed as if it was 'im as they was hirritated at. He 'ad white
kid gloves on 'is 'ands, and he pointed out the animiles to me and says:


"'Maybe it's you,' says I, for I did not like the airs as he give
'isself. He didn't git angry, as I 'oped he would, but he smiled a kind

wouldn't like me,' 'e says.


bone or two to clean their teeth on about tea-time, which you 'as a


"Well, it was a odd thing, but when the animiles see us a-talkin' they
lay down, and when I went over to Bersicker he let me stroke his ears

in his hand and stroke the old wolf's ears too!



"'Never mind,' he says. 'I'm used to 'em!'


man what trades in wolves, anceterer, is a good friend to keepers.

"'No' says he, 'not exactly in the business, but I 'ave made pets of

away. Old Bersicker kep' a-lookin' arter 'im till 'e was out of sight,
and then went and lay down in a corner and wouldn't come hout the 'ole
hevening. Well, larst night, so soon as the moon was hup, the wolves

There warn't no one near, except some one that was evidently a-callin' a
dog somewheres out back of the gardings in the Park road. Once or twice

stopped. Just before twelve o'clock I just took a look round afore
turnin' in, an', bust me, but when I kem opposite to old Bersicker's

that's all I know for certing."



"One of our gard'ners was a-comin' 'ome about that time from a 'armony,
when he sees a big grey dog comin' out through the garding 'edges. At

never said a word about it to his missis when 'e got 'ome, and it was
only after the escape of the wolf was made known, and we had been up all

anything. My own belief was that the 'armony 'ad got into his 'ead."

"Now, Mr. Bilder, can you account in any way for the escape of the


"Well, sir," he said, with a suspicious sort of modesty, "I think I can;


"Certainly I shall. If a man like you, who knows the animals from
experience, can't hazard a good guess at any rate, who is even to try?"


wolf escaped--simply because he wanted to get out."

From the hearty way that both Thomas and his wife laughed at the joke I

explanation was simply an elaborate sell. I couldn't cope in badinage
with the worthy Thomas, but I thought I knew a surer way to his heart,



and this brother of his is waiting to be claimed when you've told me


"Right y'are, sir," he said briskly. "Ye'll excoose me, I know, for
a-chaffin' of ye, but the old woman here winked at me, which was as much




"My opinion is this: that 'ere wolf is a-'idin' of, somewheres. The
gard'ner wot didn't remember said he was a-gallopin' northward faster
than a horse could go; but I don't believe him, for, yer see, sir,

way. Wolves is fine things in a storybook, and I dessay when they gets
in packs and does be chivyin' somethin' that's more afeared than they is

Lor' bless you, in real life a wolf is only a low creature, not half so
clever or bold as a good dog; and not half a quarter so much fight in

hisself, and more like he's somewhere round the Park a-'idin' an'
a-shiverin' of, and, if he thinks at all, wonderin' where he is to get

coal-cellar. My eye, won't some cook get a rum start when she sees his
green eyes a-shining at her out of the dark! If he can't get food he's
bound to look for it, and mayhap he may chance to light on a butcher's

a soldier, leavin' of the hinfant in the perambulator--well, then I
shouldn't be surprised if the census is one babby the less. That's



against the window, and Mr. Bilder's face doubled its natural length


"God bless me!" he said. "If there ain't old Bersicker come back by


He went to the door and opened it; a most unnecessary proceeding it

well as when some obstacle of pronounced durability is between us; a
personal experience has intensified rather than diminished that idea.

After all, however, there is nothing like custom, for neither Bilder nor

itself was as peaceful and well-behaved as that father of all
picture-wolves--Red Riding Hood's quondam friend, whilst moving her


The whole scene was an unutterable mixture of comedy and pathos. The

children in the town shivering in their shoes, was there in a sort of
penitent mood, and was received and petted like a sort of vulpine

solicitude, and when he had finished with his penitent said:--

"There, I knew the poor old chap would get into some kind of trouble;

glass. 'E's been a-gettin' over some bloomin' wall or other. It's a
shyme that people are allowed to top their walls with broken bottles.


He took the wolf and locked him up in a cage, with a piece of meat that
satisfied, in quantity at any rate, the elementary conditions of the


I came off, too, to report the only exclusive information that is given





_17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study posting up my
books, which, through press of other work and the many visits to Lucy,
had fallen sadly into arrear. Suddenly the door was burst open, and in

thunderstruck, for such a thing as a patient getting of his own accord
into the Superintendent's study is almost unknown. Without an instant's

as I saw he was dangerous, I tried to keep the table between us. He was
too quick and too strong for me, however; for before I could get my

Before he could strike again, however, I got in my right and he was
sprawling on his back on the floor. My wrist bled freely, and quite a

intent on further effort, and occupied myself binding up my wrist,
keeping a wary eye on the prostrate figure all the time. When the
attendants rushed in, and we turned our attention to him, his employment

up, like a dog, the blood which had fallen from my wounded wrist. He was
easily secured, and, to my surprise, went with the attendants quite

The blood is the life!"


late for my physical good, and then the prolonged strain of Lucy's
illness and its horrible phases is telling on me. I am over-excited and

me, so I need not forego my sleep; to-night I could not well do without



_Telegram, Van Helsing, Antwerp, to Seward, Carfax._


twenty-two hours.)


watching all the time frequently, visit and see that flowers are as
placed; very important; do not fail. Shall be with you as soon as





_18 September._--Just off for train to London. The arrival of Van
Helsing's telegram filled me with dismay. A whole night lost, and I know

possible that all may be well, but what _may_ have happened? Surely
there is some horrible doom hanging over us that every possible accident

me, and then I can complete my entry on Lucy's phonograph.




_17 September. Night._--I write this and leave it to be seen, so that no
one may by any chance get into trouble through me. This is an exact

have barely strength to write, but it must be done if I die in the


I went to bed as usual, taking care that the flowers were placed as Dr.


I was waked by the flapping at the window, which had begun after that
sleep-walking on the cliff at Whitby when Mina saved me, and which now I

the next room--as Dr. Van Helsing said he would be--so that I might have
called him. I tried to go to sleep, but could not. Then there came to me
the old fear of sleep, and I determined to keep awake. Perversely sleep

alone, I opened my door and called out: "Is there anybody there?" There
was no answer. I was afraid to wake mother, and so closed my door again.

more fierce and deeper. I went to the window and looked out, but could
see nothing, except a big bat, which had evidently been buffeting its
wings against the window. So I went back to bed again, but determined

seeing by my moving that I was not asleep, came in, and sat by me. She
said to me even more sweetly and softly than her wont:--




I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to come in
and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and lay down beside me; she did

and then go back to her own bed. As she lay there in my arms, and I in
hers, the flapping and buffeting came to the window again. She was
startled and a little frightened, and cried out: "What is that?" I tried

hear her poor dear heart still beating terribly. After a while there was
the low howl again out in the shrubbery, and shortly after there was a

The window blind blew back with the wind that rushed in, and in the
aperture of the broken panes there was the head of a great, gaunt grey
wolf. Mother cried out in a fright, and struggled up into a sitting

other things, she clutched the wreath of flowers that Dr. Van Helsing
insisted on my wearing round my neck, and tore it away from me. For a

and horrible gurgling in her throat; then she fell over--as if struck
with lightning, and her head hit my forehead and made me dizzy for a

eyes fixed on the window, but the wolf drew his head back, and a whole
myriad of little specks seemed to come blowing in through the broken
window, and wheeling and circling round like the pillar of dust that

stir, but there was some spell upon me, and dear mother's poor body,
which seemed to grow cold already--for her dear heart had ceased to


The time did not seem long, but very, very awful, till I recovered
consciousness again. Somewhere near, a passing bell was tolling; the

seemingly just outside, a nightingale was singing. I was dazed and
stupid with pain and terror and weakness, but the sound of the

me. The sounds seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for I could hear
their bare feet pattering outside my door. I called to them, and they

over me on the bed, they screamed out. The wind rushed in through the
broken window, and the door slammed to. They lifted off the body of my
dear mother, and laid her, covered up with a sheet, on the bed after I

to go to the dining-room and have each a glass of wine. The door flew
open for an instant and closed again. The maids shrieked, and then went

mother's breast. When they were there I remembered what Dr. Van Helsing
had told me, but I didn't like to remove them, and, besides, I would
have some of the servants to sit up with me now. I was surprised that

to the dining-room to look for them.


on the floor, breathing heavily. The decanter of sherry was on the table
half full, but there was a queer, acrid smell about. I was suspicious,

sideboard, I found that the bottle which mother's doctor uses for
her--oh! did use--was empty. What am I to do? what am I to do? I am back
in the room with mother. I cannot leave her, and I am alone, save for

dare not go out, for I can hear the low howl of the wolf through the


The air seems full of specks, floating and circling in the draught from
the window, and the lights burn blue and dim. What am I to do? God

where they shall find it when they come to lay me out. My dear mother
gone! It is time that I go too. Good-bye, dear Arthur, if I should not







DR. SEWARD'S DIARY



Keeping my cab at the gate, I went up the avenue alone. I knocked gently
and rang as quietly as possible, for I feared to disturb Lucy or her

finding no response, I knocked and rang again; still no answer. I cursed
the laziness of the servants that they should lie abed at such an

more impatiently, but still without response. Hitherto I had blamed only
the servants, but now a terrible fear began to assail me. Was this
desolation but another link in the chain of doom which seemed drawing

late? I knew that minutes, even seconds of delay, might mean hours of
danger to Lucy, if she had had again one of those frightful relapses;



I could find no means of ingress. Every window and door was fastened and
locked, and I returned baffled to the porch. As I did so, I heard the
rapid pit-pat of a swiftly driven horse's feet. They stopped at the

When he saw me, he gasped out:--


not get my telegram?"


telegram early in the morning, and had not lost a minute in coming here,
and that I could not make any one in the house hear me. He paused and


"Then I fear we are too late. God's will be done!" With his usual

in, we must make one. Time is all in all to us now."

We went round to the back of the house, where there was a kitchen

handing it to me, pointed to the iron bars which guarded the window. I
attacked them at once and had very soon cut through three of them. Then

opened the window. I helped the Professor in, and followed him. There
was no one in the kitchen or in the servants' rooms, which were close at
hand. We tried all the rooms as we went along, and in the dining-room,

servant-women lying on the floor. There was no need to think them dead,
for their stertorous breathing and the acrid smell of laudanum in the

each other, and as we moved away he said: "We can attend to them later."
Then we ascended to Lucy's room. For an instant or two we paused at the
door to listen, but there was no sound that we could hear. With white



How shall I describe what we saw? On the bed lay two women, Lucy and her
mother. The latter lay farthest in, and she was covered with a white

broken window, showing the drawn, white face, with a look of terror
fixed upon it. By her side lay Lucy, with face white and still more

mother's bosom, and her throat was bare, showing the two little wounds
which we had noticed before, but looking horribly white and mangled.
Without a word the Professor bent over the bed, his head almost touching

listens, and leaping to his feet, he cried out to me:--



I flew downstairs and returned with it, taking care to smell and taste
it, lest it, too, were drugged like the decanter of sherry which I found
on the table. The maids were still breathing, but more restlessly, and I

but returned to Van Helsing. He rubbed the brandy, as on another
occasion, on her lips and gums and on her wrists and the palms of her


"I can do this, all that can be at the present. You go wake those maids.

get heat and fire and a warm bath. This poor soul is nearly as cold as
that beside her. She will need be heated before we can do anything


I went at once, and found little difficulty in waking three of the

affected her more strongly, so I lifted her on the sofa and let her
sleep. The others were dazed at first, but as remembrance came back to

them, however, and would not let them talk. I told them that one life
was bad enough to lose, and that if they delayed they would sacrifice

as they were, and prepared fire and water. Fortunately, the kitchen and
boiler fires were still alive, and there was no lack of hot water. We
got a bath and carried Lucy out as she was and placed her in it. Whilst

of the maids ran off, hurried on some more clothes, and opened it. Then
she returned and whispered to us that there was a gentleman who had come

must wait, for we could see no one now. She went away with the message,
and, engrossed with our work, I clean forgot all about him.


earnest. I knew--as he knew--that it was a stand-up fight with death,
and in a pause told him so. He answered me in a way that I did not


"If that were all, I would stop here where we are now, and let her fade
away into peace, for I see no light in life over her horizon." He went
on with his work with, if possible, renewed and more frenzied vigour.


be of some effect. Lucy's heart beat a trifle more audibly to the
stethoscope, and her lungs had a perceptible movement. Van Helsing's

a hot sheet to dry her he said to me:--



We took Lucy into another room, which had by now been prepared, and laid
her in bed and forced a few drops of brandy down her throat. I noticed

still unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we had


Van Helsing called in one of the women, and told her to stay with her
and not to take her eyes off her till we returned, and then beckoned me


"We must consult as to what is to be done," he said as we descended the

closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been opened, but
the blinds were already down, with that obedience to the etiquette of

observes. The room was, therefore, dimly dark. It was, however, light
enough for our purposes. Van Helsing's sternness was somewhat relieved

something, so I waited for an instant, and he spoke:--

"What are we to do now? Where are we to turn for help? We must have

won't be worth an hour's purchase. You are exhausted already; I am
exhausted too. I fear to trust those women, even if they would have

veins for her?"



The voice came from the sofa across the room, and its tones brought

Helsing started angrily at the first sound, but his face softened and a
glad look came into his eyes as I cried out: "Quincey Morris!" and


"What brought you here?" I cried as our hands met.





"Have not heard from Seward for three days, and am terribly anxious.
Cannot leave. Father still in same condition. Send me word how Lucy is.


"I think I came just in the nick of time. You know you have only to tell


Van Helsing strode forward, and took his hand, looking him straight in


"A brave man's blood is the best thing on this earth when a woman is in

us for all he's worth, but God sends us men when we want them."

Once again we went through that ghastly operation. I have not the heart

told on her more than before, for though plenty of blood went into her
veins, her body did not respond to the treatment as well as on the other

and hear. However, the action of both heart and lungs improved, and Van
Helsing made a subcutaneous injection of morphia, as before, and with
good effect. Her faint became a profound slumber. The Professor watched

to pay off one of the cabmen who were waiting. I left Quincey lying down
after having a glass of wine, and told the cook to get ready a good

Lucy now was. When I came softly in, I found Van Helsing with a sheet or
two of note-paper in his hand. He had evidently read it, and was
thinking it over as he sat with his hand to his brow. There was a look

He handed me the paper saying only: "It dropped from Lucy's breast when


When I had read it, I stood looking at the Professor, and after a pause
asked him: "In God's name, what does it all mean? Was she, or is she,

did not know what to say more. Van Helsing put out his hand and took the


"Do not trouble about it now. Forget it for the present. You shall know
and understand it all in good time; but it will be later. And now what

was all myself again.


properly and wisely, there may be an inquest, and that paper would have
to be produced. I am in hopes that we need have no inquest, for if we
had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you

had disease of the heart, and we can certify that she died of it. Let us
fill up the certificate at once, and I shall take it myself to the


"Good, oh my friend John! Well thought of! Truly Miss Lucy, if she be

love her. One, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old
man. Ah yes, I know, friend John; I am not blind! I love you all the


In the hall I met Quincey Morris, with a telegram for Arthur telling him
that Mrs. Westenra was dead; that Lucy also had been ill, but was now

where I was going, and he hurried me out, but as I was going said:--

"When you come back, Jack, may I have two words with you all to

the registration, and arranged with the local undertaker to come up in
the evening to measure for the coffin and to make arrangements.


as soon as I knew about Lucy, and went up to her room. She was still
sleeping, and the Professor seemingly had not moved from his seat at her

expected her to wake before long and was afraid of forestalling nature.
So I went down to Quincey and took him into the breakfast-room, where
the blinds were not drawn down, and which was a little more cheerful, or



"Jack Seward, I don't want to shove myself in anywhere where I've no
right to be; but this is no ordinary case. You know I loved that girl
and wanted to marry her; but, although that's all past and gone, I can't

with her? The Dutchman--and a fine old fellow he is; I can see
that--said, that time you two came into the room, that you must have

Now I know well that you medical men speak _in camera_, and that a man
must not expect to know what they consult about in private. But this is



"That's so," I said, and he went on:--

"I take it that both you and Van Helsing had done already what I did




"And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw him four days ago down at his

since I was on the Pampas and had a mare that I was fond of go to grass
all in a night. One of those big bats that they call vampires had got at
her in the night, and what with his gorge and the vein left open, there

bullet through her as she lay. Jack, if you may tell me without
betraying confidence, Arthur was the first, is not that so?" As he spoke

regarding the woman he loved, and his utter ignorance of the terrible
mystery which seemed to surround her intensified his pain. His very

royal lot of it, too--to keep him from breaking down. I paused before
answering, for I felt that I must not betray anything which the
Professor wished kept secret; but already he knew so much, and guessed

in the same phrase: "That's so."





"Ten days! Then I guess, Jack Seward, that that poor pretty creature
that we all love has had put into her veins within that time the blood

coming close to me, he spoke in a fierce half-whisper: "What took it


I shook my head. "That," I said, "is the crux. Van Helsing is simply

There has been a series of little circumstances which have thrown out
all our calculations as to Lucy being properly watched. But these shall
not occur again. Here we stay until all be well--or ill." Quincey held

what to do, and I'll do it."


in her breast, and, to my surprise, produced the paper which Van Helsing
had given me to read. The careful Professor had replaced it where it had
come from, lest on waking she should be alarmed. Her eye then lit on Van

and seeing where she was, shuddered; she gave a loud cry, and put her
poor thin hands before her pale face. We both understood what that

what we could to comfort her. Doubtless sympathy eased her somewhat, but
she was very low in thought and spirit, and wept silently and weakly for
a long time. We told her that either or both of us would now remain with

into a doze. Here a very odd thing occurred. Whilst still asleep she
took the paper from her breast and tore it in two. Van Helsing stepped

with the action of tearing, as though the material were still in her
hands; finally she lifted her hands and opened them as though scattering

if in thought, but he said nothing.



_19 September._--All last night she slept fitfully, being always afraid
to sleep, and something weaker when she woke from it. The Professor and

unattended. Quincey Morris said nothing about his intention, but I knew
that all night long he patrolled round and round the house.


strength. She was hardly able to turn her head, and the little
nourishment which she could take seemed to do her no good. At times she

sleeping and waking. Whilst asleep she looked stronger, although more
haggard, and her breathing was softer; her open mouth showed the pale
gums drawn back from the teeth, which thus looked positively longer and

changed the expression, for she looked her own self, although a dying
one. In the afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him.


When he arrived it was nearly six o'clock, and the sun was setting full
and warm, and the red light streamed in through the window and gave more

with emotion, and none of us could speak. In the hours that had passed,
the fits of sleep, or the comatose condition that passed for it, had

were shortened. Arthur's presence, however, seemed to act as a
stimulant; she rallied a little, and spoke to him more brightly than she
had done since we arrived. He too pulled himself together, and spoke as


It was now nearly one o'clock, and he and Van Helsing are sitting with
her. I am to relieve them in a quarter of an hour, and I am entering

fear that to-morrow will end our watching, for the shock has been too
great; the poor child cannot rally. God help us all.








"My dearest Lucy,--


will pardon me, I know, for all my faults when you have read all my
budget of news. Well, I got my husband back all right; when we arrived

an attack of gout, Mr. Hawkins. He took us to his house, where there
were rooms for us all nice and comfortable, and we dined together. After


"'My dears, I want to drink your health and prosperity; and may every

love and pride, seen you grow up. Now I want you to make your home here
with me. I have left to me neither chick nor child; all are gone, and in
my will I have left you everything.' I cried, Lucy dear, as Jonathan and


"So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both my
bedroom and the drawing-room I can see the great elms of the cathedral
close, with their great black stems standing out against the old yellow

cawing and chattering and gossiping all day, after the manner of
rooks--and humans. I am busy, I need not tell you, arranging things and

Jonathan is a partner, Mr. Hawkins wants to tell him all about the


"How is your dear mother getting on? I wish I could run up to town for a

shoulders; and Jonathan wants looking after still. He is beginning to
put some flesh on his bones again, but he was terribly weakened by the
long illness; even now he sometimes starts out of his sleep in a sudden

placidity. However, thank God, these occasions grow less frequent as the
days go on, and they will in time pass away altogether, I trust. And now

and where, and who is to perform the ceremony, and what are you to wear,
and is it to be a public or a private wedding? Tell me all about it,
dear; tell me all about everything, for there is nothing which interests

'respectful duty,' but I do not think that is good enough from the
junior partner of the important firm Hawkins & Harker; and so, as you

of the verb, I send you simply his 'love' instead. Good-bye, my dearest




"MINA HARKER."



etc., etc., to John Seward, M. D._





"In accordance with your wishes, I enclose report of the conditions of

is more to say. He has had another outbreak, which might have had a
dreadful ending, but which, as it fortunately happened, was unattended
with any unhappy results. This afternoon a carrier's cart with two men

which, you will remember, the patient twice ran away. The men stopped at
our gate to ask the porter their way, as they were strangers. I was

saw one of them come up to the house. As he passed the window of
Renfield's room, the patient began to rate him from within, and called
him all the foul names he could lay his tongue to. The man, who seemed a

foul-mouthed beggar," whereon our man accused him of robbing him and
wanting to murder him and said that he would hinder him if he were to

so he contented himself after looking the place over and making up his
mind as to what kind of a place he had got to by saying: 'Lor' bless

pity ye and the guv'nor for havin' to live in the house with a wild
beast like that.' Then he asked his way civilly enough, and I told him
where the gate of the empty house was; he went away, followed by threats

make out any cause for his anger, since he is usually such a
well-behaved man, and except his violent fits nothing of the kind had

genial in his manner. I tried to get him to talk of the incident, but he
blandly asked me questions as to what I meant, and led me to believe

say, however, only another instance of his cunning, for within half an
hour I heard of him again. This time he had broken out through the
window of his room, and was running down the avenue. I called to the

on some mischief. My fear was justified when I saw the same cart which
had passed before coming down the road, having on it some great wooden

face, as if with violent exercise. Before I could get up to him the
patient rushed at them, and pulling one of them off the cart, began to

moment I believe he would have killed the man there and then. The other
fellow jumped down and struck him over the head with the butt-end of his
heavy whip. It was a terrible blow; but he did not seem to mind it, but

fro as if we were kittens. You know I am no light weight, and the others
were both burly men. At first he was silent in his fighting; but as we

on him, he began to shout: 'I'll frustrate them! They shan't rob me!
they shan't murder me by inches! I'll fight for my Lord and Master!' and
all sorts of similar incoherent ravings. It was with very considerable

room. One of the attendants, Hardy, had a finger broken. However, I set


"The two carriers were at first loud in their threats of actions for
damages, and promised to rain all the penalties of the law on us. Their
threats were, however, mingled with some sort of indirect apology for

had not been for the way their strength had been spent in carrying and
raising the heavy boxes to the cart they would have made short work of

state of drouth to which they had been reduced by the dusty nature of
their occupation and the reprehensible distance from the scene of their

drift, and after a stiff glass of grog, or rather more of the same, and
with each a sovereign in hand, they made light of the attack, and swore
that they would encounter a worse madman any day for the pleasure of

names and addresses, in case they might be needed. They are as
follows:--Jack Smollet, of Dudding's Rents, King George's Road, Great

Green. They are both in the employment of Harris & Sons, Moving and
Shipment Company, Orange Master's Yard, Soho.


wire you at once if there is anything of importance.








_Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra_.







"Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly.
Some may not think it so sad for us, but we had both come to so love him
that it really seems as though we had lost a father. I never knew either

Jonathan is greatly distressed. It is not only that he feels sorrow,
deep sorrow, for the dear, good man who has befriended him all his life,

fortune which to people of our modest bringing up is wealth beyond the
dream of avarice, but Jonathan feels it on another account. He says the
amount of responsibility which it puts upon him makes him nervous. He

helps him to have a belief in himself. But it is here that the grave
shock that he experienced tells upon him the most. Oh, it is too hard

enabled him by our dear, good friend's aid to rise from clerk to master
in a few years--should be so injured that the very essence of its

the midst of your own happiness; but, Lucy dear, I must tell some one,
for the strain of keeping up a brave and cheerful appearance to Jonathan
tries me, and I have no one here that I can confide in. I dread coming

Hawkins left in his will that he was to be buried in the grave with his
father. As there are no relations at all, Jonathan will have to be chief

minutes. Forgive me for troubling you. With all blessings,






_Dr. Seward's Diary._


to-night. I am too miserable, too low-spirited, too sick of the world
and all in it, including life itself, that I would not care if I heard

been flapping those grim wings to some purpose of late--Lucy's mother
and Arthur's father, and now.... Let me get on with my work.


go to rest also, but he refused at first. It was only when I told him
that we should want him to help us during the day, and that we must not
all break down for want of rest, lest Lucy should suffer, that he agreed

"come with me. You are sick and weak, and have had much sorrow and much
mental pain, as well as that tax on your strength that we know of. You

Come to the drawing-room, where there is a big fire, and there are two
sofas. You shall lie on one, and I on the other, and our sympathy will
be comfort to each other, even though we do not speak, and even if we

face, which lay in her pillow, almost whiter than the lawn. She lay
quite still, and I looked round the room to see that all was as it

as in the other, his purpose of using the garlic; the whole of the
window-sashes reeked with it, and round Lucy's neck, over the silk

the same odorous flowers. Lucy was breathing somewhat stertorously, and
her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums. Her
teeth, in the dim, uncertain light, seemed longer and sharper than they

canine teeth looked longer and sharper than the rest. I sat down by her,
and presently she moved uneasily. At the same moment there came a sort

and peeped out by the corner of the blind. There was a full moonlight,
and I could see that the noise was made by a great bat, which wheeled
round--doubtless attracted by the light, although so dim--and every now

I found that Lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away the garlic
flowers from her throat. I replaced them as well as I could, and sat


Presently she woke, and I gave her food, as Van Helsing had prescribed.

her now the unconscious struggle for life and strength that had hitherto
so marked her illness. It struck me as curious that the moment she

certainly odd that whenever she got into that lethargic state, with the
stertorous breathing, she put the flowers from her; but that when she

mistake about this, for in the long hours that followed, she had many
spells of sleeping and waking and repeated both actions many times.

At six o'clock Van Helsing came to relieve me. Arthur had then fallen

I could hear the sissing indraw of his breath, and he said to me in a
sharp whisper: "Draw up the blind; I want light!" Then he bent down,

removed the flowers and lifted the silk handkerchief from her throat. As
he did so he started back, and I could hear his ejaculation, "Mein

and as I noticed some queer chill came over me.



For fully five minutes Van Helsing stood looking at her, with his face
at its sternest. Then he turned to me and said calmly:--

"She is dying. It will not be long now. It will be much difference, mark

let him come and see the last; he trusts us, and we have promised him."

I went to the dining-room and waked him. He was dazed for a moment, but

he thought he was late, and expressed his fear. I assured him that Lucy
was still asleep, but told him as gently as I could that both Van
Helsing and I feared that the end was near. He covered his face with his

perhaps a minute, with his head buried, praying, whilst his shoulders
shook with grief. I took him by the hand and raised him up. "Come," I




his usual forethought, been putting matters straight and making
everything look as pleasing as possible. He had even brushed Lucy's

came into the room she opened her eyes, and seeing him, whispered


"Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so glad you have come!" He was stooping to

yet! Hold her hand; it will comfort her more."

So Arthur took her hand and knelt beside her, and she looked her best,

gradually her eyes closed, and she sank to sleep. For a little bit her
breast heaved softly, and her breath came and went like a tired child's.


the night. Her breathing grew stertorous, the mouth opened, and the pale
gums, drawn back, made the teeth look longer and sharper than ever. In a
sort of sleep-waking, vague, unconscious way she opened her eyes, which

such as I had never heard from her lips:--

"Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so glad you have come! Kiss me!" Arthur bent

had been startled by her voice, swooped upon him, and catching him by
the neck with both hands, dragged him back with a fury of strength which

across the room.


he stood between them like a lion at bay.


or say; and before any impulse of violence could seize him he realised
the place and the occasion, and stood silent, waiting.


of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champed
together. Then her eyes closed, and she breathed heavily.


putting out her poor, pale, thin hand, took Van Helsing's great brown
one; drawing it to her, she kissed it. "My true friend," she said, in a

guard him, and give me peace!"


hand, as one who registers an oath. Then he turned to Arthur, and said
to him: "Come, my child, take her hand in yours, and kiss her on the


Their eyes met instead of their lips; and so they parted.


Arthur's arm, and drew him away.

And then Lucy's breathing became stertorous again, and all at once it




I took Arthur by the arm, and led him away to the drawing-room, where he
sat down, and covered his face with his hands, sobbing in a way that


I went back to the room, and found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and

Death had given back part of her beauty, for her brow and cheeks had
recovered some of their flowing lines; even the lips had lost their

of the heart, had gone to make the harshness of death as little rude as


    "We thought her dying whilst she slept,




"Ah, well, poor girl, there is peace for her at last. It is the end!"

He turned to me, and said with grave solemnity:--



When I asked him what he meant, he only shook his head and answered:--








DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_.


The funeral was arranged for the next succeeding day, so that Lucy and

formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were
afflicted--or blessed--with something of his own obsequious suavity.

me, in a confidential, brother-professional way, when she had come out


"She makes a very beautiful corpse, sir. It's quite a privilege to
attend on her. It's not too much to say that she will do credit to our



the disordered state of things in the household. There were no relatives
at hand; and as Arthur had to be back the next day to attend at his
father's funeral, we were unable to notify any one who should have been

ourselves to examine papers, etc. He insisted upon looking over Lucy's
papers himself. I asked him why, for I feared that he, being a

so might in ignorance make some unnecessary trouble. He answered me:--

"I know; I know. You forget that I am a lawyer as well as a doctor. But

coroner. I have more than him to avoid. There may be papers more--such


As he spoke he took from his pocket-book the memorandum which had been
in Lucy's breast, and which she had torn in her sleep.


Westenra, seal all her papers, and write him to-night. For me, I watch
here in the room and in Miss Lucy's old room all night, and I myself

the hands of strangers."


the name and address of Mrs. Westenra's solicitor and had written to
him. All the poor lady's papers were in order; explicit directions

letter, when, to my surprise, Van Helsing walked into the room,


"Can I help you, friend John? I am free, and if I may, my service is to


"Have you got what you looked for?" I asked, to which he replied:--


have, all that there was--only some letters and a few memoranda, and a
diary new begun. But I have them here, and we shall for the present say

his sanction, I shall use some."



"And now, friend John, I think we may to bed. We want sleep, both you
and I, and rest to recuperate. To-morrow we shall have much to do, but


Before turning in we went to look at poor Lucy. The undertaker had
certainly done his work well, for the room was turned into a small

and death was made as little repulsive as might be. The end of the
winding-sheet was laid over the face; when the Professor bent over and

wax candles showing a sufficient light to note it well. All Lucy's
loveliness had come back to her in death, and the hours that had passed,

restored the beauty of life, till positively I could not believe my eyes


The Professor looked sternly grave. He had not loved her as I had, and
there was no need for tears in his eyes. He said to me: "Remain till I
return," and left the room. He came back with a handful of wild garlic

placed the flowers amongst the others on and around the bed. Then he
took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and



I was undressing in my own room, when, with a premonitory tap at the
door, he entered, and at once began to speak:--




"Must we make an autopsy?" I asked.

"Yes and no. I want to operate, but not as you think. Let me tell you

her heart. Ah! you a surgeon, and so shocked! You, whom I have seen with
no tremble of hand or heart, do operations of life and death that make

you loved her; and I have not forgotten it, for it is I that shall
operate, and you must only help. I would like to do it to-night, but for
Arthur I must not; he will be free after his father's funeral to-morrow,

ready for the next day, you and I shall come when all sleep. We shall
unscrew the coffin-lid, and shall do our operation: and then replace


"But why do it at all? The girl is dead. Why mutilate her poor body

to gain by it--no good to her, to us, to science, to human
knowledge--why do it? Without such it is monstrous."




"Friend John, I pity your poor bleeding heart; and I love you the more
because it does so bleed. If I could, I would take on myself the burden
that you do bear. But there are things that you know not, but that you

things. John, my child, you have been my friend now many years, and yet
did you ever know me to do any without good cause? I may err--I am but

send for me when the great trouble came? Yes! Were you not amazed, nay
horrified, when I would not let Arthur kiss his love--though she was

how she thanked me, with her so beautiful dying eyes, her voice, too, so
weak, and she kiss my rough old hand and bless me? Yes! And did you not
hear me swear promise to her, that so she closed her eyes grateful? Yes!


years trust me; you have believe me weeks past, when there be things so
strange that you might have well doubt. Believe me yet a little, friend

not perhaps well. And if I work--as work I shall, no matter trust or no
trust--without my friend trust in me, I work with heavy heart and feel,
oh! so lonely when I want all help and courage that may be!" He paused a

terrible days before us. Let us not be two, but one, that so we work to


I took his hand, and promised him. I held my door open as he went away,
and watched him go into his room and close the door. As I stood without
moving, I saw one of the maids pass silently along the passage--she had

lay. The sight touched me. Devotion is so rare, and we are so grateful
to those who show it unasked to those we love. Here was a poor girl

alone by the bier of the mistress whom she loved, so that the poor clay
might not be lonely till laid to eternal rest....



I must have slept long and soundly, for it was broad daylight when Van

said:--



"Why not?" I asked. For his solemnity of the night before had greatly


"Because," he said sternly, "it is too late--or too early. See!" Here he


"How, stolen," I asked in wonder, "since you have it now?"

"Because I get it back from the worthless wretch who stole it, from the

come, but not through me; she knew not altogether what she did and thus
unknowing, she only stole. Now we must wait."


new puzzle to grapple with.


Marquand, of Wholeman, Sons, Marquand & Lidderdale. He was very genial
and very appreciative of what we had done, and took off our hands all

some time expected sudden death from her heart, and had put her affairs
in absolute order; he informed us that, with the exception of a certain
entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct

real and personal, was left absolutely to Arthur Holmwood. When he had


"Frankly we did our best to prevent such a testamentary disposition, and
pointed out certain contingencies that might leave her daughter either
penniless or not so free as she should be to act regarding a matrimonial

collision, for she asked us if we were or were not prepared to carry out
her wishes. Of course, we had then no alternative but to accept. We were

have proved, by the logic of events, the accuracy of our judgment.
Frankly, however, I must admit that in this case any other form of

wishes. For by her predeceasing her daughter the latter would have come
into possession of the property, and, even had she only survived her

will--and a will was a practical impossibility in such a case--have been
treated at her decease as under intestacy. In which case Lord Godalming,
though so dear a friend, would have had no claim in the world; and the

rights, for sentimental reasons regarding an entire stranger. I assure
you, my dear sirs, I am rejoiced at the result, perfectly rejoiced."


he was officially interested--of so great a tragedy, was an
object-lesson in the limitations of sympathetic understanding.


see Lord Godalming. His coming, however, had been a certain comfort to
us, since it assured us that we should not have to dread hostile

a little before that time we visited the death-chamber. It was so in
very truth, for now both mother and daughter lay in it. The undertaker,
true to his craft, had made the best display he could of his goods, and

once. Van Helsing ordered the former arrangement to be adhered to,
explaining that, as Lord Godalming was coming very soon, it would be

quite alone. The undertaker seemed shocked at his own stupidity and
exerted himself to restore things to the condition in which we left them
the night before, so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings


Poor fellow! He looked desperately sad and broken; even his stalwart

much-tried emotions. He had, I knew, been very genuinely and devotedly
attached to his father; and to lose him, and at such a time, was a

was sweetly courteous; but I could not help seeing that there was some
constraint with him. The Professor noticed it, too, and motioned me to

felt he would like to be quite alone with her, but he took my arm and


"You loved her too, old fellow; she told me all about it, and there was
no friend had a closer place in her heart than you. I don't know how to


Here he suddenly broke down, and threw his arms round my shoulders and
laid his head on my breast, crying:--


all at once, and there is nothing in the wide world for me to live for."

I comforted him as well as I could. In such cases men do not need much

shoulder, a sob in unison, are expressions of sympathy dear to a man's
heart. I stood still and silent till his sobs died away, and then I said




Together we moved over to the bed, and I lifted the lawn from her face.
God! how beautiful she was. Every hour seemed to be enhancing her

fell a-trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as with an ague. At
last, after a long pause, he said to me in a faint whisper:--



I assured him sadly that it was so, and went on to suggest--for I felt

I could help--that it often happened that after death faces became
softened and even resolved into their youthful beauty; that this was
especially so when death had been preceded by any acute or prolonged

kneeling beside the couch for a while and looking at her lovingly and
long, he turned aside. I told him that that must be good-bye, as the

and kissed it, and bent over and kissed her forehead. He came away,
fondly looking back over his shoulder at her as he came.


good-bye; so the latter went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker's men
to proceed with the preparations and to screw up the coffin. When he



"I am not surprised. Just now I doubted for a moment myself!"

We all dined together, and I could see that poor Art was trying to make

when we had lit our cigars he said--



"No, no, not that, for God's sake! not yet at any rate. Forgive me, sir:
I did not mean to speak offensively; it is only because my loss is so




"I only used that name because I was in doubt. I must not call you
'Mr.,' and I have grown to love you--yes, my dear boy, to love you--as




"Call me what you will," he said. "I hope I may always have the title of
a friend. And let me say that I am at a loss for words to thank you for

that she understood your goodness even better than I do; and if I was
rude or in any way wanting at that time you acted so--you remember"--the


He answered with a grave kindness:--


violence needs to understand; and I take it that you do not--that you
cannot--trust me now, for you do not yet understand. And there may be

not--and must not yet understand. But the time will come when your trust
shall be whole and complete in me, and when you shall understand as
though the sunlight himself shone through. Then you shall bless me from

dear sake to whom I swore to protect."


trust you. I know and believe you have a very noble heart, and you are
Jack's friend, and you were hers. You shall do what you like."


speak, and finally said:--





"You know that Mrs. Westenra left you all her property?"



"And as it is all yours, you have a right to deal with it as you will. I
want you to give me permission to read all Miss Lucy's papers and

be sure, she would have approved. I have them all here. I took them
before we knew that all was yours, so that no strange hand might touch

them, if I may; even you may not see them yet, but I shall keep them
safe. No word shall be lost; and in the good time I shall give them back
to you. It's a hard thing I ask, but you will do it, will you not, for




"Dr. Van Helsing, you may do what you will. I feel that in saying this I
am doing what my dear one would have approved. I shall not trouble you




"And you are right. There will be pain for us all; but it will not be
all pain, nor will this pain be the last. We and you too--you most of
all, my dear boy--will have to pass through the bitter water before we

duty, and all will be well!"


bed at all. He went to and fro, as if patrolling the house, and was
never out of sight of the room where Lucy lay in her coffin, strewn with

a heavy, overpowering smell into the night.




_22 September._--In the train to Exeter. Jonathan sleeping.

It seems only yesterday that the last entry was made, and yet how much

no news of him; and now, married to Jonathan, Jonathan a solicitor, a
partner, rich, master of his business, Mr. Hawkins dead and buried, and

about it. Down it all goes. I am rusty in my shorthand--see what
unexpected prosperity does for us--so it may be as well to freshen it up


The service was very simple and very solemn. There were only ourselves
and the servants there, one or two old friends of his from Exeter, his

President of the Incorporated Law Society. Jonathan and I stood hand in
hand, and we felt that our best and dearest friend was gone from us....


Jonathan thought it would interest me to go into the Row for a while, so
we sat down; but there were very few people there, and it was

of the empty chair at home; so we got up and walked down Piccadilly.
Jonathan was holding me by the arm, the way he used to in old days

for some years teaching etiquette and decorum to other girls without the
pedantry of it biting into yourself a bit; but it was Jonathan, and he
was my husband, and we didn't know anybody who saw us--and we didn't

girl, in a big cart-wheel hat, sitting in a victoria outside Guiliano's,
when I felt Jonathan clutch my arm so tight that he hurt me, and he said

fear that some nervous fit may upset him again; so I turned to him
quickly, and asked him what it was that disturbed him.


half in amazement, he gazed at a tall, thin man, with a beaky nose and
black moustache and pointed beard, who was also observing the pretty

and so I had a good view of him. His face was not a good face; it was
hard, and cruel, and sensual, and his big white teeth, that looked all
the whiter because his lips were so red, were pointed like an animal's.

feared he might take it ill, he looked so fierce and nasty. I asked
Jonathan why he was disturbed, and he answered, evidently thinking that


"No, dear," I said; "I don't know him; who is it?" His answer seemed to
shock and thrill me, for it was said as if he did not know that it was




The poor dear was evidently terrified at something--very greatly
terrified; I do believe that if he had not had me to lean on and to

the shop with a small parcel, and gave it to the lady, who then drove
off. The dark man kept his eyes fixed on her, and when the carriage

hansom. Jonathan kept looking after him, and said, as if to himself:--

"I believe it is the Count, but he has grown young. My God, if this be

distressing himself so much that I feared to keep his mind on the
subject by asking him any questions, so I remained silent. I drew him
away quietly, and he, holding my arm, came easily. We walked a little

a hot day for autumn, and there was a comfortable seat in a shady place.
After a few minutes' staring at nothing, Jonathan's eyes closed, and he

was the best thing for him, so did not disturb him. In about twenty
minutes he woke up, and said to me quite cheerfully:--


Come, and we'll have a cup of tea somewhere." He had evidently forgotten
all about the dark stranger, as in his illness he had forgotten all that

forgetfulness; it may make or continue some injury to the brain. I must
not ask him, for fear I shall do more harm than good; but I must somehow
learn the facts of his journey abroad. The time is come, I fear, when I

I know, forgive me if I do wrong, but it is for your own dear sake.



_Later._--A sad home-coming in every way--the house empty of the dear
soul who was so good to us; Jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight
relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from Van Helsing, whoever he



that Lucy died the day before yesterday. They were both buried to-day."

Oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few words! Poor Mrs. Westenra! poor
Lucy! Gone, gone, never to return to us! And poor, poor Arthur, to have




_Dr. Seward's Diary._


taken Quincey Morris with him. What a fine fellow is Quincey! I believe
in my heart of hearts that he suffered as much about Lucy's death as any

can go on breeding men like that, she will be a power in the world
indeed. Van Helsing is lying down, having a rest preparatory to his

to-morrow night; that he only wants to make some arrangements which can
only be made personally. He is to stop with me then, if he can; he says
he has work to do in London which may take him some time. Poor old

iron strength. All the time of the burial he was, I could see, putting
some terrible restraint on himself. When it was all over, we were

the operation where his blood had been transfused to his Lucy's veins; I
could see Van Helsing's face grow white and purple by turns. Arthur was
saying that he felt since then as if they two had been really married

the other operations, and none of us ever shall. Arthur and Quincey went
away together to the station, and Van Helsing and I came on here. The

hysterics. He has denied to me since that it was hysterics, and insisted
that it was only his sense of humour asserting itself under very

the blinds lest any one should see us and misjudge; and then he cried,
till he laughed again; and laughed and cried together, just as a woman
does. I tried to be stern with him, as one is to a woman under the

manifestations of nervous strength or weakness! Then when his face grew
grave and stern again I asked him why his mirth, and why at such a time.

forceful and mysterious. He said:--


though I laugh. See, I have cried even when the laugh did choke me. But
no more think that I am all sorry when I cry, for the laugh he come
just the same. Keep it always with you that laughter who knock at your

king, and he come when and how he like. He ask no person; he choose no
time of suitability. He say, 'I am here.' Behold, in example I grieve my

I am old and worn; I give my time, my skill, my sleep; I let my other
sufferers want that so she may have all. And yet I can laugh at her very
grave--laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon her

from my cheek. My heart bleed for that poor boy--that dear boy, so of
the age of mine own boy had I been so blessed that he live, and with his

when he say things that touch my husband-heart to the quick, and make my
father-heart yearn to him as to no other man--not even to you, friend
John, for we are more level in experiences than father and son--yet even

'Here I am! here I am!' till the blood come dance back and bring some of
the sunshine that he carry with him to my cheek. Oh, friend John, it is

troubles; and yet when King Laugh come he make them all dance to the
tune he play. Bleeding hearts, and dry bones of the churchyard, and

make with that smileless mouth of him. And believe me, friend John, that
he is good to come, and kind. Ah, we men and women are like ropes drawn
tight with strain that pull us different ways. Then tears come; and,

become too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come like the
sunshine, and he ease off the strain again; and we bear to go on with


I did not like to wound him by pretending not to see his idea; but, as I

answered me his face grew stern, and he said in quite a different


"Oh, it was the grim irony of it all--this so lovely lady garlanded with
flowers, that looked so fair as life, till one by one we wondered if she

churchyard, where rest so many of her kin, laid there with the mother
who loved her, and whom she loved; and that sacred bell going 'Toll!

garments of the angel, pretending to read books, and yet all the time
their eyes never on the page; and all of us with the bowed head. And all


"Well, for the life of me, Professor," I said, "I can't see anything to
laugh at in all that. Why, your explanation makes it a harder puzzle

Art and his trouble? Why, his heart was simply breaking."

"Just so. Said he not that the transfusion of his blood to her veins had




"Quite so. But there was a difficulty, friend John. If so that, then
what about the others? Ho, ho! Then this so sweet maid is a polyandrist,
and me, with my poor wife dead to me, but alive by Church's law, though



"I don't see where the joke comes in there either!" I said; and I did
not feel particularly pleased with him for saying such things. He laid


"Friend John, forgive me if I pain. I showed not my feeling to others
when it would wound, but only to you, my old friend, whom I can trust.

if you could have done so when the laugh arrived; if you could do so
now, when King Laugh have pack up his crown, and all that is to him--for

perhaps pity me the most of all."



"Because I know!"


sit over our roofs with brooding wings. Lucy lies in the tomb of her
kin, a lordly death-house in a lonely churchyard, away from teeming

and where wild flowers grow of their own accord.

So I can finish this diary; and God only knows if I shall ever begin

different people and different themes; for here at the end, where the
romance of my life is told, ere I go back to take up the thread of my





_"The Westminster Gazette," 25 September._




The neighbourhood of Hampstead is just at present exercised with a
series of events which seem to run on lines parallel to those of what

"The Stabbing Woman," or "The Woman in Black." During the past two or
three days several cases have occurred of young children straying from
home or neglecting to return from their playing on the Heath. In all

intelligible account of themselves, but the consensus of their excuses
is that they had been with a "bloofer lady." It has always been late in

children have not been found until early in the following morning. It is
generally supposed in the neighbourhood that, as the first child missed

come for a walk, the others had picked up the phrase and used it as
occasion served. This is the more natural as the favourite game of the

correspondent writes us that to see some of the tiny tots pretending to
be the "bloofer lady" is supremely funny. Some of our caricaturists
might, he says, take a lesson in the irony of grotesque by comparing the

principles of human nature that the "bloofer lady" should be the popular
rôle at these _al fresco_ performances. Our correspondent naïvely says

these grubby-faced little children pretend--and even imagine


There is, however, possibly a serious side to the question, for some of
the children, indeed all who have been missed at night, have been

made by a rat or a small dog, and although of not much importance
individually, would tend to show that whatever animal inflicts them has

instructed to keep a sharp look-out for straying children, especially
when very young, in and around Hampstead Heath, and for any stray dog



               _"The Westminster Gazette," 25 September._





                         ANOTHER CHILD INJURED.



We have just received intelligence that another child, missed last
night, was only discovered late in the morning under a furze bush at the
Shooter's Hill side of Hampstead Heath, which is, perhaps, less

throat as has been noticed in other cases. It was terribly weak, and
looked quite emaciated. It too, when partially restored, had the common







MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL



he has plenty of work to do, for that keeps his mind off the terrible
things; and oh, I am rejoiced that he is not now weighed down with the

and now how proud I am to see my Jonathan rising to the height of his
advancement and keeping pace in all ways with the duties that come upon
him. He will be away all day till late, for he said he could not lunch

and lock myself up in my room and read it....



record of Jonathan's upset me so. Poor dear! How he must have suffered,
whether it be true or only imagination. I wonder if there is any truth
in it at all. Did he get his brain fever, and then write all those

never know, for I dare not open the subject to him.... And yet that man
we saw yesterday! He seemed quite certain of him.... Poor fellow! I

train of thought.... He believes it all himself. I remember how on our
wedding-day he said: "Unless some solemn duty come upon me to go back to

through it all some thread of continuity.... That fearful Count was
coming to London.... If it should be, and he came to London, with his
teeming millions.... There may be a solemn duty; and if it come we must

this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall be ready for other
eyes if required. And if it be wanted; then, perhaps, if I am ready,

him be troubled or worried with it at all. If ever Jonathan quite gets
over the nervousness he may want to tell me of it all, and I can ask him



_Letter, Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._







"I pray you to pardon my writing, in that I am so far friend as that I
sent to you sad news of Miss Lucy Westenra's death. By the kindness of

deeply concerned about certain matters vitally important. In them I find
some letters from you, which show how great friends you were and how you
love her. Oh, Madam Mina, by that love, I implore you, help me. It is

and terrible troubles--that may be more great than you can know. May it
be that I see you? You can trust me. I am friend of Dr. John Seward and

for the present from all. I should come to Exeter to see you at once if
you tell me I am privilege to come, and where and when. I implore your
pardon, madam. I have read your letters to poor Lucy, and know how good

enlighten him not, lest it may harm. Again your pardon, and forgive me.




_Telegram, Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing._


it. Can see you any time you call.





_25 September._--I cannot help feeling terribly excited as the time
draws near for the visit of Dr. Van Helsing, for somehow I expect that

attended poor dear Lucy in her last illness, he can tell me all about
her. That is the reason of his coming; it is concerning Lucy and her

truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of my
imagination and tinges everything with something of its own colour. Of

awful night on the cliff must have made her ill. I had almost forgotten
in my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have told him
of her sleep-walking adventure on the cliff, and that I knew all about

understand. I hope I did right in not saying anything of it to Mrs.
Westenra; I should never forgive myself if any act of mine, were it even

Helsing will not blame me; I have had so much trouble and anxiety of
late that I feel I cannot bear more just at present.


does. Perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset me, and
then Jonathan went away this morning to stay away from me a whole day

hope the dear fellow will take care of himself, and that nothing will
occur to upset him. It is two o'clock, and the doctor will be here soon

so glad I have type-written out my own journal, so that, in case he asks
about Lucy, I can hand it to him; it will save much questioning.



_Later._--He has come and gone. Oh, what a strange meeting, and how it
all makes my head whirl round! I feel like one in a dream. Can it be all

first, I should never have accepted even a possibility. Poor, poor, dear
Jonathan! How he must have suffered. Please the good God, all this may
not upset him again. I shall try to save him from it; but it may be even

consequences--to know for certain that his eyes and ears and brain did
not deceive him, and that it is all true. It may be that it is the doubt

which--waking or dreaming--may prove the truth, he will be more
satisfied and better able to bear the shock. Dr. Van Helsing must be a

Seward's, and if they brought him all the way from Holland to look after
Lucy. I feel from having seen him that he _is_ good and kind and of a

and then, please God, all this sorrow and anxiety may lead to a good
end. I used to think I would like to practise interviewing; Jonathan's
friend on "The Exeter News" told him that memory was everything in such

spoken, even if you had to refine some of it afterwards. Here was a rare


It was half-past two o'clock when the knock came. I took my courage _à
deux mains_ and waited. In a few minutes Mary opened the door, and


I rose and bowed, and he came towards me; a man of medium weight,
strongly built, with his shoulders set back over a broad, deep chest and

of the head strikes one at once as indicative of thought and power; the
head is noble, well-sized, broad, and large behind the ears. The face,

mouth, a good-sized nose, rather straight, but with quick, sensitive
nostrils, that seem to broaden as the big, bushy brows come down and the
mouth tightens. The forehead is broad and fine, rising at first almost

such a forehead that the reddish hair cannot possibly tumble over it,
but falls naturally back and to the sides. Big, dark blue eyes are set



"Mrs. Harker, is it not?" I bowed assent.



"It is Mina Murray that I came to see that was friend of that poor dear
child Lucy Westenra. Madam Mina, it is on account of the dead I come."

"Sir," I said, "you could have no better claim on me than that you were

it and said tenderly:--


good, but I had yet to learn----" He finished his speech with a courtly
bow. I asked him what it was that he wanted to see me about, so he at


"I have read your letters to Miss Lucy. Forgive me, but I had to begin

with her at Whitby. She sometimes kept a diary--you need not look
surprised, Madam Mina; it was begun after you had left, and was in

things to a sleep-walking in which she puts down that you saved her. In
great perplexity then I come to you, and ask you out of your so much


"I can tell you, I think, Dr. Van Helsing, all about it."


so with young ladies."


if you like."


could not resist the temptation of mystifying him a bit--I suppose it is
some of the taste of the original apple that remains still in our

bow, and said:--




an instant his face fell. Then he stood up and bowed.

"Oh, you so clever woman!" he said. "I knew long that Mr. Jonathan was a

And will you not so much honour me and so help me as to read it for me?
Alas! I know not the shorthand." By this time my little joke was over,
and I was almost ashamed; so I took the typewritten copy from my


"Forgive me," I said: "I could not help it; but I had been thinking that

have time to wait--not on my account, but because I know your time must
be precious--I have written it out on the typewriter for you."


I read it now? I may want to ask you some things when I have read."

"By all means," I said, "read it over whilst I order lunch; and then you
can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a

whilst I went to see after lunch chiefly in order that he might not be
disturbed. When I came back, I found him walking hurriedly up and down

took me by both hands.


is as sunshine. It opens the gate to me. I am daze, I am dazzle, with so
much light, and yet clouds roll in behind the light every time. But that

clever woman. Madam"--he said this very solemnly--"if ever Abraham Van
Helsing can do anything for you or yours, I trust you will let me know.
It will be pleasure and delight if I may serve you as a friend; as a

and those you love. There are darknesses in life, and there are lights;
you are one of the lights. You will have happy life and good life, and


"But, doctor, you praise me too much, and--and you do not know me."


women; I, who have made my specialty the brain and all that belongs to
him and all that follow from him! And I have read your diary that you
have so goodly written for me, and which breathes out truth in every

marriage and your trust, not know you! Oh, Madam Mina, good women tell
all their lives, and by day and by hour and by minute, such things that

angels' eyes. Your husband is noble nature, and you are noble too, for
you trust, and trust cannot be where there is mean nature. And your

is he strong and hearty?" I saw here an opening to ask him about


"He was almost recovered, but he has been greatly upset by Mr. Hawkins's


"Oh, yes, I know, I know. I have read your last two letters." I went


"I suppose this upset him, for when we were in town on Thursday last he


"A shock, and after brain fever so soon! That was not good. What kind of


"He thought he saw some one who recalled something terrible, something

overwhelm me in a rush. The pity for Jonathan, the horror which he
experienced, the whole fearful mystery of his diary, and the fear that

was hysterical, for I threw myself on my knees and held up my hands to
him, and implored him to make my husband well again. He took my hands
and raised me up, and made me sit on the sofa, and sat by me; he held my


"My life is a barren and lonely one, and so full of work that I have not
had much time for friendships; but since I have been summoned to here by

nobility that I feel more than ever--and it has grown with my advancing
years--the loneliness of my life. Believe, me, then, that I come here
full of respect for you, and you have given me hope--hope, not in what I

happy--good women, whose lives and whose truths may make good lesson for
the children that are to be. I am glad, glad, that I may here be of some

study and experience. I promise you that I will gladly do _all_ for him
that I can--all to make his life strong and manly, and your life a happy
one. Now you must eat. You are overwrought and perhaps over-anxious.

where he love, is not to his good. Therefore for his sake you must eat
and smile. You have told me all about Lucy, and so now we shall not

want to think much over what you have told me, and when I have thought I
will ask you questions, if I may. And then, too, you will tell me of
husband Jonathan's trouble so far as you can, but not yet. You must eat


After lunch, when we went back to the drawing-room, he said to me:--


learned man, I began to fear that he would think me a weak fool, and
Jonathan a madman--that journal is all so strange--and I hesitated to go

trusted him, so I said:--


laugh at me or at my husband. I have been since yesterday in a sort of
fever of doubt; you must be kind to me, and not think me foolish that I
have even half believed some very strange things." He reassured me by


"Oh, my dear, if you only know how strange is the matter regarding which
I am here, it is you who would laugh. I have learned not to think little

an open mind; and it is not the ordinary things of life that could close
it, but the strange things, the extraordinary things, the things that


"Thank you, thank you, a thousand times! You have taken a weight off my
mind. If you will let me, I shall give you a paper to read. It is long,

Jonathan's. It is the copy of his journal when abroad, and all that
happened. I dare not say anything of it; you will read for yourself and



"I promise," he said as I gave him the papers; "I shall in the morning,
so soon as I can, come to see you and your husband, if I may."

"Jonathan will be here at half-past eleven, and you must come to lunch

will leave you at Paddington before eight." He was surprised at my
knowledge of the trains off-hand, but he does not know that I have made

case he is in a hurry.


thinking--thinking I don't know what.





"_25 September, 6 o'clock._



"I have read your husband's so wonderful diary. You may sleep without

life on it. It may be worse for others; but for him and you there is no
dread. He is a noble fellow; and let me tell you from experience of men,
that one who would do as he did in going down that wall and to that

permanence by a shock. His brain and his heart are all right; this I
swear, before I have even seen him; so be at rest. I shall have much to

I have learn all at once so much that again I am dazzle--dazzle more


"Yours the most faithful,








"My dear Dr. Van Helsing,--


off my mind. And yet, if it be true, what terrible things there are in
the world, and what an awful thing if that man, that monster, be really
in London! I fear to think. I have this moment, whilst writing, had a

Launceston and will be here at 10:18, so that I shall have no fear
to-night. Will you, therefore, instead of lunching with us, please come

get away, if you are in a hurry, by the 10:30 train, which will bring
you to Paddington by 2:35. Do not answer this, as I shall take it that,




"Your faithful and grateful friend,






_26 September._--I thought never to write in this diary again, but the
time has come. When I got home last night Mina had supper ready, and

given him the two diaries copied out, and of how anxious she has been
about me. She showed me in the doctor's letter that all I wrote down was
true. It seems to have made a new man of me. It was the doubt as to the

the dark, and distrustful. But, now that I _know_, I am not afraid, even
of the Count. He has succeeded after all, then, in his design in getting

is the man to unmask him and hunt him out, if he is anything like what
Mina says. We sat late, and talked it all over. Mina is dressing, and I
shall call at the hotel in a few minutes and bring him over....


was, and introduced myself, he took me by the shoulder, and turned my
face round to the light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny:--


so funny to hear my wife called "Madam Mina" by this kindly,


"I _was_ ill, I _have_ had a shock; but you have cured me already."



"By your letter to Mina last night. I was in doubt, and then everything
took a hue of unreality, and I did not know what to trust, even the

what to do; and so had only to keep on working in what had hitherto been
the groove of my life. The groove ceased to avail me, and I mistrusted

yourself. No, you don't; you couldn't with eyebrows like yours." He
seemed pleased, and laughed as he said:--


so much pleasure coming to you to breakfast; and, oh, sir, you will
pardon praise from an old man, but you are blessed in your wife." I



"She is one of God's women, fashioned by His own hand to show us men and
other women that there is a heaven where we can enter, and that its
light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an

selfish. And you, sir--I have read all the letters to poor Miss Lucy,
and some of them speak of you, so I know you since some days from the

will give me your hand, will you not? And let us be friends for all our


We shook hands, and he was so earnest and so kind that it made me quite


"And now," he said, "may I ask you for some more help? I have a great

Can you tell me what went before your going to Transylvania? Later on I
may ask more help, and of a different kind; but at first this will do."

"Look here, sir," I said, "does what you have to do concern the Count?"



"Then I am with you heart and soul. As you go by the 10:30 train, you

You can take them with you and read them in the train."

After breakfast I saw him to the station. When we were parting he





"We shall both come when you will," I said.

I had got him the morning papers and the London papers of the previous

train to start, he was turning them over. His eyes suddenly seemed to
catch something in one of them, "The Westminster Gazette"--I knew it by

groaning to himself: "Mein Gott! Mein Gott! So soon! so soon!" I do not
think he remembered me at the moment. Just then the whistle blew, and
the train moved off. This recalled him to himself, and he leaned out of

write so soon as ever I can."




_26 September._--Truly there is no such thing as finality. Not a week

going on with the same record. Until this afternoon I had no cause to
think of what is done. Renfield had become, to all intents, as sane as

just started in the spider line also; so he had not been of any trouble
to me. I had a letter from Arthur, written on Sunday, and from it I

him, and that is much of a help, for he himself is a bubbling well of
good spirits. Quincey wrote me a line too, and from him I hear that
Arthur is beginning to recover something of his old buoyancy; so as to

work with the enthusiasm which I used to have for it, so that I might
fairly have said that the wound which poor Lucy left on me was becoming

end God only knows. I have an idea that Van Helsing thinks he knows,
too, but he will only let out enough at a time to whet curiosity. He

back, and almost bounded into the room at about half-past five o'clock,
and thrust last night's "Westminster Gazette" into my hand.


arms.


took it from me and pointed out a paragraph about children being decoyed
away at Hampstead. It did not convey much to me, until I reached a

idea struck me, and I looked up. "Well?" he said.





"Simply that there is some cause in common. Whatever it was that injured
her has injured them." I did not quite understand his answer:--



"How do you mean, Professor?" I asked. I was a little inclined to take
his seriousness lightly--for, after all, four days of rest and freedom

when I saw his face, it sobered me. Never, even in the midst of our
despair about poor Lucy, had he looked more stern.


think, and I have no data on which to found a conjecture."

"Do you mean to tell me, friend John, that you have no suspicion as to

events, but by me?"



"And how the blood lost or waste?" I shook my head. He stepped over and


"You are clever man, friend John; you reason well, and your wit is bold;
but you are too prejudiced. You do not let your eyes see nor your ears

you. Do you not think that there are things which you cannot understand,
and yet which are; that some people see things that others cannot? But
there are things old and new which must not be contemplate by men's

have told them. Ah, it is the fault of our science that it wants to
explain all; and if it explain not, then it says there is nothing to

which think themselves new; and which are yet but the old, which pretend
to be young--like the fine ladies at the opera. I suppose now you do not
believe in corporeal transference. No? Nor in materialisation. No? Nor



"Yes," I said. "Charcot has proved that pretty well." He smiled as he
went on: "Then you are satisfied as to it. Yes? And of course then you

Charcot--alas that he is no more!--into the very soul of the patient
that he influence. No? Then, friend John, am I to take it that you

be a blank? No? Then tell me--for I am student of the brain--how you
accept the hypnotism and reject the thought reading. Let me tell you, my
friend, that there are things done to-day in electrical science which

electricity--who would themselves not so long before have been burned

Methuselah lived nine hundred years, and 'Old Parr' one hundred and
sixty-nine, and yet that poor Lucy, with four men's blood in her poor
veins, could not live even one day? For, had she live one more day, we

you know the altogether of comparative anatomy and can say wherefore the
qualities of brutes are in some men, and not in others? Can you tell me

for centuries in the tower of the old Spanish church and grew and grew,
till, on descending, he could drink the oil of all the church lamps? Can
you tell me why in the Pampas, ay and elsewhere, there are bats that

veins; how in some islands of the Western seas there are bats which hang
on the trees all day, and those who have seen describe as like giant

it is hot, flit down on them, and then--and then in the morning are
found dead men, white as even Miss Lucy was?"


Lucy was bitten by such a bat; and that such a thing is here in London
in the nineteenth century?" He waved his hand for silence, and went


"Can you tell me why the tortoise lives more long than generations of

why the parrot never die only of bite of cat or dog or other complaint?
Can you tell me why men believe in all ages and places that there are

women who cannot die? We all know--because science has vouched for the
fact--that there have been toads shut up in rocks for thousands of

the world. Can you tell me how the Indian fakir can make himself to die
and have been buried, and his grave sealed and corn sowed on it, and the
corn reaped and be cut and sown and reaped and cut again, and then men

fakir, not dead, but that rise up and walk amongst them as before?" Here
I interrupted him. I was getting bewildered; he so crowded on my mind

imagination was getting fired. I had a dim idea that he was teaching me
some lesson, as long ago he used to do in his study at Amsterdam; but
he used then to tell me the thing, so that I could have the object of

wanted to follow him, so I said:--


that I may apply your knowledge as you go on. At present I am going in
my mind from point to point as a mad man, and not a sane one, follows an

from one tussock to another in the mere blind effort to move on without


"That is good image," he said. "Well, I shall tell you. My thesis is


"To believe what?"


of an American who so defined faith: 'that faculty which enables us to
believe things which we know to be untrue.' For one, I follow that man.

truth check the rush of a big truth, like a small rock does a railway
truck. We get the small truth first. Good! We keep him, and we value
him; but all the same we must not let him think himself all the truth in



receptivity of my mind with regard to some strange matter. Do I read


"Ah, you are my favourite pupil still. It is worth to teach you. Now
that you are willing to understand, you have taken the first step to

throats were made by the same that made the hole in Miss Lucy?"

"I suppose so." He stood up and said solemnly:--




"In God's name, Professor Van Helsing, what do you mean?" I cried.

He threw himself with a despairing gesture into a chair, and placed his
elbows on the table, covering his face with his hands as he spoke:--











For a while sheer anger mastered me; it was as if he had during her life
struck Lucy on the face. I smote the table hard and rose up as I said to


"Dr. Van Helsing, are you mad?" He raised his head and looked at me, and

said. "Madness were easy to bear compared with truth like this. Oh, my
friend, why, think you, did I go so far round, why take so long to tell

my life? Was it because I wished to give you pain? Was it that I wanted,
now so late, revenge for that time when you saved my life, and from a


"Forgive me," said I. He went on:--


for I know you have loved that so sweet lady. But even yet I do not
expect you to believe. It is so hard to accept at once any abstract

believed the 'no' of it; it is more hard still to accept so sad a
concrete truth, and of such a one as Miss Lucy. To-night I go to prove


This staggered me. A man does not like to prove such a truth; Byron




He saw my hesitation, and spoke:--

"The logic is simple, no madman's logic this time, jumping from tussock

at worst it will not harm. If it be true! Ah, there is the dread; yet
very dread should help my cause, for in it is some need of belief. Come,

in the hospital. Dr. Vincent, of the North Hospital, where the papers
say the child is, is friend of mine, and I think of yours since you were
in class at Amsterdam. He will let two scientists see his case, if he

wish to learn. And then----"


spend the night, you and I, in the churchyard where Lucy lies. This is
the key that lock the tomb. I had it from the coffin-man to give to

ordeal before us. I could do nothing, however, so I plucked up what
heart I could and said that we had better hasten, as the afternoon was


We found the child awake. It had had a sleep and taken some food, and

throat, and showed us the punctures. There was no mistaking the
similarity to those which had been on Lucy's throat. They were smaller,

attributed them, and he replied that it must have been a bite of some
animal, perhaps a rat; but, for his own part, he was inclined to think

heights of London. "Out of so many harmless ones," he said, "there may
be some wild specimen from the South of a more malignant species. Some
sailor may have brought one home, and it managed to escape; or even from

there from a vampire. These things do occur, you know. Only ten days ago
a wolf got out, and was, I believe, traced up in this direction. For a

Heath and in every alley in the place until this 'bloofer lady' scare
came along, since when it has been quite a gala-time with them. Even
this poor little mite, when he woke up to-day, asked the nurse if he

to play with the 'bloofer lady.'"


you will caution its parents to keep strict watch over it. These fancies
to stray are most dangerous; and if the child were to remain out another
night, it would probably be fatal. But in any case I suppose you will


"Certainly not, not for a week at least; longer if the wound is not



the sun had dipped before we came out. When Van Helsing saw how dark it


"There is no hurry. It is more late than I thought. Come, let us seek
somewhere that we may eat, and then we shall go on our way."


bicyclists and others who were genially noisy. About ten o'clock we
started from the inn. It was then very dark, and the scattered lamps

radius. The Professor had evidently noted the road we were to go, for he
went on unhesitatingly; but, as for me, I was in quite a mixup as to

last we were somewhat surprised when we met even the patrol of horse
police going their usual suburban round. At last we reached the wall of

it was very dark, and the whole place seemed so strange to us--we found
the Westenra tomb. The Professor took the key, opened the creaky door,
and standing back, politely, but quite unconsciously, motioned me to

courtliness of giving preference on such a ghastly occasion. My
companion followed me quickly, and cautiously drew the door to, after

one. In the latter case we should have been in a bad plight. Then he
fumbled in his bag, and taking out a matchbox and a piece of candle,

with fresh flowers, had looked grim and gruesome enough; but now, some
days afterwards, when the flowers hung lank and dead, their whites

beetle had resumed their accustomed dominance; when time-discoloured
stone, and dust-encrusted mortar, and rusty, dank iron, and tarnished

candle, the effect was more miserable and sordid than could have been
imagined. It conveyed irresistibly the idea that life--animal life--was


Van Helsing went about his work systematically. Holding his candle so
that he could read the coffin plates, and so holding it that the sperm

made assurance of Lucy's coffin. Another search in his bag, and he took


"What are you going to do?" I asked.


taking out the screws, and finally lifted off the lid, showing the
casing of lead beneath. The sight was almost too much for me. It seemed

stripped off her clothing in her sleep whilst living; I actually took
hold of his hand to stop him. He only said: "You shall see," and again
fumbling in his bag, took out a tiny fret-saw. Striking the turnscrew

made a small hole, which was, however, big enough to admit the point of
the saw. I had expected a rush of gas from the week-old corpse. We

such things, and I drew back towards the door. But the Professor never
stopped for a moment; he sawed down a couple of feet along one side of
the lead coffin, and then across, and down the other side. Taking the

coffin, and holding up the candle into the aperture, motioned to me to




It was certainly a surprise to me, and gave me a considerable shock, but
Van Helsing was unmoved. He was now more sure than ever of his ground,
and so emboldened to proceed in his task. "Are you satisfied now, friend


I felt all the dogged argumentativeness of my nature awake within me as



proves one thing."





"That is good logic," he said, "so far as it goes. But how do you--how


"Perhaps a body-snatcher," I suggested. "Some of the undertaker's people
may have stolen it." I felt that I was speaking folly, and yet it was

well!" he said, "we must have more proof. Come with me."

He put on the coffin-lid again, gathered up all his things and placed

bag. We opened the door, and went out. Behind us he closed the door and
locked it. He handed me the key, saying: "Will you keep it? You had
better be assured." I laughed--it was not a very cheerful laugh, I am

"there may be duplicates; and anyhow it is not difficult to pick a lock
of that kind." He said nothing, but put the key in his pocket. Then he

the other. I took up my place behind a yew-tree, and I saw his dark
figure move until the intervening headstones and trees hid it from my


It was a lonely vigil. Just after I had taken my place I heard a distant

unnerved, and angry with the Professor for taking me on such an errand
and with myself for coming. I was too cold and too sleepy to be keenly

a dreary, miserable time.


streak, moving between two dark yew-trees at the side of the churchyard
farthest from the tomb; at the same time a dark mass moved from the

too moved; but I had to go round headstones and railed-off tombs, and I
stumbled over graves. The sky was overcast, and somewhere far off an
early cock crew. A little way off, beyond a line of scattered

figure flitted in the direction of the tomb. The tomb itself was hidden
by trees, and I could not see where the figure disappeared. I heard the

coming over, found the Professor holding in his arms a tiny child. When






"Do you not see the child?"




"We shall see," said the Professor, and with one impulse we took our way
out of the churchyard, he carrying the sleeping child.


trees, and struck a match, and looked at the child's throat. It was


"Was I right?" I asked triumphantly.



We had now to decide what we were to do with the child, and so consulted
about it. If we were to take it to a police-station we should have to

have had to make some statement as to how we had come to find the child.
So finally we decided that we would take it to the Heath, and when we
heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not fail to find

well. At the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman's heavy
tramp, and laying the child on the pathway, we waited and watched until

of astonishment, and then we went away silently. By good chance we got a
cab near the "Spaniards," and drove to town.


sleep, as Van Helsing is to call for me at noon. He insists that I shall


       *       *       *       *       *

_27 September._--It was two o'clock before we found a suitable

and the last stragglers of the mourners had taken themselves lazily
away, when, looking carefully from behind a clump of alder-trees, we saw

morning did we desire it; but the Professor told me that we should not
want more than an hour at most. Again I felt that horrid sense of the

place; and I realised distinctly the perils of the law which we were
incurring in our unhallowed work. Besides, I felt it was all so useless.
Outrageous as it was to open a leaden coffin, to see if a woman dead

open the tomb again, when we knew, from the evidence of our own
eyesight, that the coffin was empty. I shrugged my shoulders, however,

no matter who remonstrated. He took the key, opened the vault, and again
courteously motioned me to precede. The place was not so gruesome as

streamed in. Van Helsing walked over to Lucy's coffin, and I followed.
He bent over and again forced back the leaden flange; and then a shock


There lay Lucy, seemingly just as we had seen her the night before her
funeral. She was, if possible, more radiantly beautiful than ever; and I

before; and on the cheeks was a delicate bloom.



"Are you convinced now?" said the Professor in response, and as he spoke
he put over his hand, and in a way that made me shudder, pulled back the


"See," he went on, "see, they are even sharper than before. With this

it--"the little children can be bitten. Are you of belief now, friend
John?" Once more, argumentative hostility woke within me. I _could_ not
accept such an overwhelming idea as he suggested; so, with an attempt to


"She may have been placed here since last night."





"And yet she has been dead one week. Most peoples in that time would not
look so." I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing did not
seem to notice my silence; at any rate, he showed neither chagrin nor

the eyelids and looking at the eyes, and once more opening the lips and
examining the teeth. Then he turned to me and said:--


some dual life that is not as the common. She was bitten by the vampire
when she was in a trance, sleep-walking--oh, you start; you do not know
that, friend John, but you shall know it all later--and in trance could

is Un-Dead, too. So it is that she differ from all other. Usually when
the Un-Dead sleep at home"--as he spoke he made a comprehensive sweep of

they are, but this so sweet that was when she not Un-Dead she go back to
the nothings of the common dead. There is no malign there, see, and so
it make hard that I must kill her in her sleep." This turned my blood

theories; but if she were really dead, what was there of terror in the
idea of killing her? He looked up at me, and evidently saw the change in




I answered: "Do not press me too hard all at once. I am willing to


"I shall cut off her head and fill her mouth with garlic, and I shall
drive a stake through her body." It made me shudder to think of so
mutilating the body of the woman whom I had loved. And yet the feeling

shudder at the presence of this being, this Un-Dead, as Van Helsing
called it, and to loathe it. Is it possible that love is all subjective,



if wrapped in thought. Presently he closed the catch of his bag with a


"I have been thinking, and have made up my mind as to what is best. If I
did simply follow my inclining I would do now, at this moment, what is
to be done; but there are other things to follow, and things that are

simple. She have yet no life taken, though that is of time; and to act
now would be to take danger from her for ever. But then we may have to

wounds on Lucy's throat, and saw the wounds so similar on the child's at
the hospital; if you, who saw the coffin empty last night and full

beautiful in a whole week, after she die--if you know of this and know
of the white figure last night that brought the child to the churchyard,
and yet of your own senses you did not believe, how, then, can I expect

took him from her kiss when she was dying. I know he has forgiven me
because in some mistaken idea I have done things that prevent him say

this woman was buried alive; and that in most mistake of all we have
killed her. He will then argue back that it is we, mistaken ones, that

he never can be sure; and that is the worst of all. And he will
sometimes think that she he loved was buried alive, and that will paint
his dreams with horrors of what she must have suffered; and again, he

an Un-Dead. No! I told him once, and since then I learn much. Now, since
I know it is all true, a hundred thousand times more do I know that he

must have one hour that will make the very face of heaven grow black to
him; then we can act for good all round and send him peace. My mind is
made up. Let us go. You return home for to-night to your asylum, and see

churchyard in my own way. To-morrow night you will come to me to the
Berkeley Hotel at ten of the clock. I shall send for Arthur to come too,

shall all have work to do. I come with you so far as Piccadilly and
there dine, for I must be back here before the sun set."


churchyard, which was not much of a task, and drove back to Piccadilly.


_Note left by Van Helsing in his portmanteau, Berkeley Hotel directed to






"Friend John,--


that churchyard. It pleases me that the Un-Dead, Miss Lucy, shall not
leave to-night, that so on the morrow night she may be more eager.

crucifix--and so seal up the door of the tomb. She is young as Un-Dead,
and will heed. Moreover, these are only to prevent her coming out; they

desperate, and must find the line of least resistance, whatsoever it may
be. I shall be at hand all the night from sunset till after the sunrise,

Lucy or from her, I have no fear; but that other to whom is there that
she is Un-Dead, he have now the power to seek her tomb and find shelter.
He is cunning, as I know from Mr. Jonathan and from the way that all

we lost; and in many ways the Un-Dead are strong. He have always the
strength in his hand of twenty men; even we four who gave our strength

I know not what. So if it be that he come thither on this night he shall
find me; but none other shall--until it be too late. But it may be that
he will not attempt the place. There is no reason why he should; his

Un-Dead woman sleep, and the one old man watch.


the diaries of Harker and the rest, and read them, and then find this
great Un-Dead, and cut off his head and burn his heart or drive a stake


"If it be so, farewell.







_28 September._--It is wonderful what a good night's sleep will do for

ideas; but now they seem to start out lurid before me as outrages on
common sense. I have no doubt that he believes it all. I wonder if his
mind can have become in any way unhinged. Surely there must be _some_

the Professor can have done it himself? He is so abnormally clever that
if he went off his head he would carry out his intent with regard to

it would be almost as great a marvel as the other to find that Van
Helsing was mad; but anyhow I shall watch him carefully. I may get some




_29 September, morning._.... Last night, at a little before ten o'clock,
Arthur and Quincey came into Van Helsing's room; he told us all that he
wanted us to do, but especially addressing himself to Arthur, as if all

all come with him too, "for," he said, "there is a grave duty to be done
there. You were doubtless surprised at my letter?" This query was


"I was. It rather upset me for a bit. There has been so much trouble
around my house of late that I could do without any more. I have been

more we talked, the more puzzled we got, till now I can say for myself
that I'm about up a tree as to any meaning about anything."



"Oh," said the Professor, "then you are nearer the beginning, both of

even get so far as to begin."


mind without my saying a word. Then, turning to the other two, he said


"I want your permission to do what I think good this night. It is, I
know, much to ask; and when you know what it is I propose to do you will
know, and only then, how much. Therefore may I ask that you promise me

time--I must not disguise from myself the possibility that such may


"That's frank anyhow," broke in Quincey. "I'll answer for the Professor.
I don't quite see his drift, but I swear he's honest; and that's good


"I thank you, sir," said Van Helsing proudly. "I have done myself the

to me." He held out a hand, which Quincey took.



"Dr. Van Helsing, I don't quite like to 'buy a pig in a poke,' as they
say in Scotland, and if it be anything in which my honour as a gentleman

If you can assure me that what you intend does not violate either of
these two, then I give my consent at once; though for the life of me, I


"I accept your limitation," said Van Helsing, "and all I ask of you is
that if you feel it necessary to condemn any act of mine, you will first



"Agreed!" said Arthur; "that is only fair. And now that the
_pourparlers_ are over, may I ask what it is we are to do?"


Kingstead."



"Where poor Lucy is buried?" The Professor bowed. Arthur went on: "And




"Professor, are you in earnest; or it is some monstrous joke? Pardon me,
I see that you are in earnest." He sat down again, but I could see that

silence until he asked again:--





"This is too much!" he said, angrily rising again. "I am willing to be
patient in all things that are reasonable; but in this--this desecration

Professor looked pityingly at him.

"If I could spare you one pang, my poor friend," he said, "God knows I

for ever, the feet you love must walk in paths of flame!"



"Take care, sir, take care!"


"And then you will at least know the limit of my purpose. Shall I go




After a pause Van Helsing went on, evidently with an effort:--

"Miss Lucy is dead; is it not so? Yes! Then there can be no wrong to




"Good God!" he cried. "What do you mean? Has there been any mistake; has
she been buried alive?" He groaned in anguish that not even hope could


"I did not say she was alive, my child; I did not think it. I go no


"Un-Dead! Not alive! What do you mean? Is this all a nightmare, or what


"There are mysteries which men can only guess at, which age by age they

I have not done. May I cut off the head of dead Miss Lucy?"

"Heavens and earth, no!" cried Arthur in a storm of passion. "Not for

Van Helsing, you try me too far. What have I done to you that you should
torture me so? What did that poor, sweet girl do that you should want to
cast such dishonour on her grave? Are you mad that speak such things, or

desecration; I shall not give my consent to anything you do. I have a
duty to do in protecting her grave from outrage; and, by God, I shall do



said, gravely and sternly:--


to you, a duty to the dead; and, by God, I shall do it! All I ask you
now is that you come with me, that you look and listen; and if when

fulfilment even than I am, then--then I shall do my duty, whatever it
may seem to me. And then, to follow of your Lordship's wishes I shall
hold myself at your disposal to render an account to you, when and where



"But, I beseech you, do not go forth in anger with me. In a long life of
acts which were often not pleasant to do, and which sometimes did wring

the time comes for you to change your mind towards me, one look from
you will wipe away all this so sad hour, for I would do what a man can
to save you from sorrow. Just think. For why should I give myself so

to do what I can of good; at the first to please my friend John, and
then to help a sweet young lady, whom, too, I came to love. For her--I

gave; the blood of my veins; I gave it, I, who was not, like you, her
lover, but only her physician and her friend. I gave to her my nights

even now, when she is the dead Un-Dead, she shall have it freely." He
said this with a very grave, sweet pride, and Arthur was much affected
by it. He took the old man's hand and said in a broken voice:--


shall go with you and wait."









It was just a quarter before twelve o'clock when we got into the

of moonlight between the rents of the heavy clouds that scudded across
the sky. We all kept somehow close together, with Van Helsing slightly
in front as he led the way. When we had come close to the tomb I looked

sorrowful a memory would upset him; but he bore himself well. I took it
that the very mystery of the proceeding was in some way a counteractant

hesitation amongst us for various reasons, solved the difficulty by
entering first himself. The rest of us followed, and he closed the door.
He then lit a dark lantern and pointed to the coffin. Arthur stepped


"You were with me here yesterday. Was the body of Miss Lucy in that




"You hear; and yet there is no one who does not believe with me." He
took his screwdriver and again took off the lid of the coffin. Arthur

forward. He evidently did not know that there was a leaden coffin, or,
at any rate, had not thought of it. When he saw the rent in the lead,
the blood rushed to his face for an instant, but as quickly fell away

Van Helsing forced back the leaden flange, and we all looked in and




For several minutes no one spoke a word. The silence was broken by


"Professor, I answered for you. Your word is all I want. I wouldn't ask
such a thing ordinarily--I wouldn't so dishonour you as to imply a



"I swear to you by all that I hold sacred that I have not removed nor
touched her. What happened was this: Two nights ago my friend Seward and
I came here--with good purpose, believe me. I opened that coffin, which

saw something white come through the trees. The next day we came here in
day-time, and she lay there. Did she not, friend John?"




and we find it, thank God, unharmed amongst the graves. Yesterday I came
here before sundown, for at sundown the Un-Dead can move. I waited here
all the night till the sun rose, but I saw nothing. It was most probable

which the Un-Dead cannot bear, and other things which they shun. Last
night there was no exodus, so to-night before the sundown I took away my

bear with me. So far there is much that is strange. Wait you with me
outside, unseen and unheard, and things much stranger are yet to be.

He opened the door, and we filed out, he coming last and locking the


Oh! but it seemed fresh and pure in the night air after the terror of
that vault. How sweet it was to see the clouds race by, and the passing

passing--like the gladness and sorrow of a man's life; how sweet it was
to breathe the fresh air, that had no taint of death and decay; how
humanising to see the red lighting of the sky beyond the hill, and to

in his own way was solemn and overcome. Arthur was silent, and was, I
could see, striving to grasp the purpose and the inner meaning of the

throw aside doubt and to accept Van Helsing's conclusions. Quincey
Morris was phlegmatic in the way of a man who accepts all things, and

stake. Not being able to smoke, he cut himself a good-sized plug of
tobacco and began to chew. As to Van Helsing, he was employed in a

thin, wafer-like biscuit, which was carefully rolled up in a white
napkin; next he took out a double-handful of some whitish stuff, like
dough or putty. He crumbled the wafer up fine and worked it into the

strips, began to lay them into the crevices between the door and its
setting in the tomb. I was somewhat puzzled at this, and being close,

also, as they too were curious. He answered:--



"And is that stuff you have put there going to do it?" asked Quincey.


"It is."


Arthur. Van Helsing reverently lifted his hat as he answered:--

"The Host. I brought it from Amsterdam. I have an Indulgence." It was an

that in the presence of such earnest purpose as the Professor's, a
purpose which could thus use the to him most sacred of things, it was

assigned to us close round the tomb, but hidden from the sight of any
one approaching. I pitied the others, especially Arthur. I had myself

who had up to an hour ago repudiated the proofs, felt my heart sink
within me. Never did tombs look so ghastly white; never did cypress, or
yew, or juniper so seem the embodiment of funereal gloom; never did tree

mysteriously; and never did the far-away howling of dogs send such a


There was a long spell of silence, a big, aching void, and then from the
Professor a keen "S-s-s-s!" He pointed; and far down the avenue of yews

dark at its breast. The figure stopped, and at the moment a ray of
moonlight fell upon the masses of driving clouds and showed in startling
prominence a dark-haired woman, dressed in the cerements of the grave.

fair-haired child. There was a pause and a sharp little cry, such as a
child gives in sleep, or a dog as it lies before the fire and dreams. We

he stood behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as we looked the
white figure moved forwards again. It was now near enough for us to see

and I could hear the gasp of Arthur, as we recognised the features of
Lucy Westenra. Lucy Westenra, but yet how changed. The sweetness was
turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous

all advanced too; the four of us ranged in a line before the door of the
tomb. Van Helsing raised his lantern and drew the slide; by the

were crimson with fresh blood, and that the stream had trickled over her
chin and stained the purity of her lawn death-robe.


Van Helsing's iron nerve had failed. Arthur was next to me, and if I had
not seized his arm and held him up, he would have fallen.


shape--saw us she drew back with an angry snarl, such as a cat gives
when taken unawares; then her eyes ranged over us. Lucy's eyes in form

the pure, gentle orbs we knew. At that moment the remnant of my love
passed into hate and loathing; had she then to be killed, I could have
done it with savage delight. As she looked, her eyes blazed with unholy

how it made me shudder to see it! With a careless motion, she flung to
the ground, callous as a devil, the child that up to now she had

over a bone. The child gave a sharp cry, and lay there moaning. There
was a cold-bloodedness in the act which wrung a groan from Arthur; when

back and hid his face in his hands.

She still advanced, however, and with a languorous, voluptuous grace,



hungry for you. Come, and we can rest together. Come, my husband, come!"

There was something diabolically sweet in her tones--something of the

who heard the words addressed to another. As for Arthur, he seemed under
a spell; moving his hands from his face, he opened wide his arms. She
was leaping for them, when Van Helsing sprang forward and held between

suddenly distorted face, full of rage, dashed past him as if to enter


When within a foot or two of the door, however, she stopped, as if

shown in the clear burst of moonlight and by the lamp, which had now no
quiver from Van Helsing's iron nerves. Never did I see such baffled
malice on a face; and never, I trust, shall such ever be seen again by

out sparks of hell-fire, the brows were wrinkled as though the folds of
the flesh were the coils of Medusa's snakes, and the lovely,

the Greeks and Japanese. If ever a face meant death--if looks could


And so for full half a minute, which seemed an eternity, she remained
between the lifted crucifix and the sacred closing of her means of


"Answer me, oh my friend! Am I to proceed in my work?"

Arthur threw himself on his knees, and hid his face in his hands, as he



this ever any more;" and he groaned in spirit. Quincey and I
simultaneously moved towards him, and took his arms. We could hear the

to the tomb, he began to remove from the chinks some of the sacred
emblem which he had placed there. We all looked on in horrified

body as real at that moment as our own, pass in through the interstice
where scarce a knife-blade could have gone. We all felt a glad sense of
relief when we saw the Professor calmly restoring the strings of putty




"Come now, my friends; we can do no more till to-morrow. There is a
funeral at noon, so here we shall all come before long after that. The

the gate we shall remain. Then there is more to do; but not like this of
to-night. As for this little one, he is not much harm, and by to-morrow
night he shall be well. We shall leave him where the police will find



"My friend Arthur, you have had a sore trial; but after, when you look
back, you will see how it was necessary. You are now in the bitter

passed them, and have drunk of the sweet waters; so do not mourn
overmuch. Till then I shall not ask you to forgive me."


on the way. We had left the child in safety, and were tired; so we all
slept with more or less reality of sleep.



_29 September, night._--A little before twelve o'clock we three--Arthur,

notice that by common consent we had all put on black clothes. Of
course, Arthur wore black, for he was in deep mourning, but the rest of

strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when the
gravediggers had completed their task and the sexton under the belief
that every one had gone, had locked the gate, we had the place all to

long leather one, something like a cricketing bag; it was manifestly of


When we were alone and had heard the last of the footsteps die out up
the road, we silently, and as if by ordered intention, followed the

behind us. Then he took from his bag the lantern, which he lit, and also
two wax candles, which, when lighted, he stuck, by melting their own

by. When he again lifted the lid off Lucy's coffin we all looked--Arthur
trembling like an aspen--and saw that the body lay there in all its

loathing for the foul Thing which had taken Lucy's shape without her
soul. I could see even Arthur's face grow hard as he looked. Presently


"Is this really Lucy's body, or only a demon in her shape?"


as she was, and is."


the bloodstained, voluptuous mouth--which it made one shudder to
see--the whole carnal and unspiritual appearance, seeming like a

methodicalness, began taking the various contents from his bag and
placing them ready for use. First he took out a soldering iron and some

a corner of the tomb, gas which burned at fierce heat with a blue
flame; then his operating knives, which he placed to hand; and last a
round wooden stake, some two and a half or three inches thick and about

was sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy hammer, such
as in households is used in the coal-cellar for breaking the lumps. To

bracing, but the effect of these things on both Arthur and Quincey was
to cause them a sort of consternation. They both, however, kept their


When all was ready, Van Helsing said:--


experience of the ancients and of all those who have studied the powers
of the Un-Dead. When they become such, there comes with the change the

adding new victims and multiplying the evils of the world; for all that
die from the preying of the Un-Dead becomes themselves Un-Dead, and prey
on their kind. And so the circle goes on ever widening, like as the

that kiss which you know of before poor Lucy die; or again, last night
when you open your arms to her, you would in time, when you had died,

all time make more of those Un-Deads that so have fill us with horror.
The career of this so unhappy dear lady is but just begun. Those
children whose blood she suck are not as yet so much the worse; but if

power over them they come to her; and so she draw their blood with that
so wicked mouth. But if she die in truth, then all cease; the tiny

unknowing ever of what has been. But of the most blessed of all, when
this now Un-Dead be made to rest as true dead, then the soul of the poor

night and growing more debased in the assimilating of it by day, she
shall take her place with the other Angels. So that, my friend, it will
be a blessed hand for her that shall strike the blow that sets her free.

right? Will it be no joy to think of hereafter in the silence of the
night when sleep is not: 'It was my hand that sent her to the stars; it

herself have chosen, had it been to her to choose?' Tell me if there be


We all looked at Arthur. He saw, too, what we all did, the infinite
kindness which suggested that his should be the hand which would restore

said bravely, though his hand trembled, and his face was as pale as


"My true friend, from the bottom of my broken heart I thank you. Tell me
what I am to do, and I shall not falter!" Van Helsing laid a hand on his


"Brave lad! A moment's courage, and it is done. This stake must be

that--but it will be only a short time, and you will then rejoice more
than your pain was great; from this grim tomb you will emerge as though

think that we, your true friends, are round you, and that we pray for


"Go on," said Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me what I am to do."

"Take this stake in your left hand, ready to place the point over the

the dead--I shall read him, I have here the book, and the others shall
follow--strike in God's name, that so all may be well with the dead that


Arthur took the stake and the hammer, and when once his mind was set on
action his hands never trembled nor even quivered. Van Helsing opened

could. Arthur placed the point over the heart, and as I looked I could
see its dint in the white flesh. Then he struck with all his might.


came from the opened red lips. The body shook and quivered and twisted
in wild contortions; the sharp white teeth champed together till the
lips were cut, and the mouth was smeared with a crimson foam. But Arthur

rose and fell, driving deeper and deeper the mercy-bearing stake, whilst
the blood from the pierced heart welled and spurted up around it. His

gave us courage so that our voices seemed to ring through the little


And then the writhing and quivering of the body became less, and the
teeth seemed to champ, and the face to quiver. Finally it lay still. The


The hammer fell from Arthur's hand. He reeled and would have fallen had

and his breath came in broken gasps. It had indeed been an awful strain
on him; and had he not been forced to his task by more than human

minutes we were so taken up with him that we did not look towards the
coffin. When we did, however, a murmur of startled surprise ran from one

been seated on the ground, and came and looked too; and then a glad,
strange light broke over his face and dispelled altogether the gloom of


There, in the coffin lay no longer the foul Thing that we had so dreaded
and grown to hate that the work of her destruction was yielded as a

her life, with her face of unequalled sweetness and purity. True that
there were there, as we had seen them in life, the traces of care and

to what we knew. One and all we felt that the holy calm that lay like
sunshine over the wasted face and form was only an earthly token and


Van Helsing came and laid his hand on Arthur's shoulder, and said to


"And now, Arthur my friend, dear lad, am I not forgiven?"


in his, and raising it to his lips, pressed it, and said:--

"Forgiven! God bless you that you have given my dear one her soul again,

his head on his breast, cried for a while silently, whilst we stood
unmoving. When he raised his head Van Helsing said to him:--


she would have you to, if for her to choose. For she is not a grinning
devil now--not any more a foul Thing for all eternity. No longer she is
the devil's Un-Dead. She is God's true dead, whose soul is with Him!"


tomb; the Professor and I sawed the top off the stake, leaving the point
of it in the body. Then we cut off the head and filled the mouth with

and gathering up our belongings, came away. When the Professor locked


Outside the air was sweet, the sun shone, and the birds sang, and it
seemed as if all nature were tuned to a different pitch. There was
gladness and mirth and peace everywhere, for we were at rest ourselves


Before we moved away Van Helsing said:--


to ourselves. But there remains a greater task: to find out the author
of all this our sorrow and to stamp him out. I have clues which we can

it, and pain. Shall you not all help me? We have learned to believe, all
of us--is it not so? And since so, do we not see our duty? Yes! And do


Each in turn, we took his hand, and the promise was made. Then said the


"Two nights hence you shall meet with me and dine together at seven of
the clock with friend John. I shall entreat two others, two that you
know not as yet; and I shall be ready to all our work show and our plans

about, and you can help me. To-night I leave for Amsterdam, but shall
return to-morrow night. And then begins our great quest. But first I

Then our promise shall be made to each other anew; for there is a
terrible task before us, and once our feet are on the ploughshare we










When we arrived at the Berkeley Hotel, Van Helsing found a telegram


     "Am coming up by train. Jonathan at Whitby. Important news.--MINA


The Professor was delighted. "Ah, that wonderful Madam Mina," he said,
"pearl among women! She arrive, but I cannot stay. She must go to your

route_, so that she may be prepared."


a diary kept by Jonathan Harker when abroad, and gave me a typewritten
copy of it, as also of Mrs. Harker's diary at Whitby. "Take these," he
said, "and study them well. When I have returned you will be master of

them safe, for there is in them much of treasure. You will need all your
faith, even you who have had such an experience as that of to-day. What

papers as he spoke, "may be the beginning of the end to you and me and
many another; or it may sound the knell of the Un-Dead who walk the

any way to the story here told do so, for it is all-important. You have
kept diary of all these so strange things; is it not so? Yes! Then we
shall go through all these together when we meet." He then made ready

took my way to Paddington, where I arrived about fifteen minutes before


The crowd melted away, after the bustling fashion common to arrival
platforms; and I was beginning to feel uneasy, lest I might miss my

after a quick glance, said: "Dr. Seward, is it not?"

"And you are Mrs. Harker!" I answered at once; whereupon she held out



suddenly, and a quick blush overspread her face.

The blush that rose to my own cheeks somehow set us both at ease, for it

typewriter, and we took the Underground to Fenchurch Street, after I had
sent a wire to my housekeeper to have a sitting-room and bedroom


In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was a

when we entered.


she had much to say. So here I am finishing my entry in my phonograph
diary whilst I await her. As yet I have not had the chance of looking at

me. I must get her interested in something, so that I may have an
opportunity of reading them. She does not know how precious time is, or
what a task we have in hand. I must be careful not to frighten her. Here





_29 September._--After I had tidied myself, I went down to Dr. Seward's

with some one. As, however, he had pressed me to be quick, I knocked at
the door, and on his calling out, "Come in," I entered.


and on the table opposite him was what I knew at once from the
description to be a phonograph. I had never seen one, and was much



as I heard you talking, and thought there was some one with you."

"Oh," he replied with a smile, "I was only entering my diary."



"Yes," he answered. "I keep it in this." As he spoke he laid his hand on
the phonograph. I felt quite excited over it, and blurted out:--



"Certainly," he replied with alacrity, and stood up to put it in train
for speaking. Then he paused, and a troubled look overspread his face.


it is entirely--almost entirely--about my cases, it may be awkward--that
is, I mean----" He stopped, and I tried to help him out of his


"You helped to attend dear Lucy at the end. Let me hear how she died;



To my surprise, he answered, with a horrorstruck look in his face:--

"Tell you of her death? Not for the wide world!"


Again he paused, and I could see that he was trying to invent an excuse.


"You see, I do not know how to pick out any particular part of the
diary." Even while he was speaking an idea dawned upon him, and he said
with unconscious simplicity, in a different voice, and with the naïveté

not but smile, at which he grimaced. "I gave myself away that time!" he
said. "But do you know that, although I have kept the diary for months

part of it in case I wanted to look it up?" By this time my mind was
made up that the diary of a doctor who attended Lucy might have

I said boldly:--


typewriter." He grew to a positively deathly pallor as he said:--

"No! no! no! For all the world, I wouldn't let you know that terrible



and as my eyes ranged the room, unconsciously looking for something or
some opportunity to aid me, they lit on a great batch of typewriting on
the table. His eyes caught the look in mine, and, without his thinking,


"You do not know me," I said. "When you have read those papers--my own
diary and my husband's also, which I have typed--you will know me

this cause; but, of course, you do not know me--yet; and I must not


He is certainly a man of noble nature; poor dear Lucy was right about
him. He stood up and opened a large drawer, in which were arranged in
order a number of hollow cylinders of metal covered with dark wax, and



But I know you now; and let me say that I should have known you long
ago. I know that Lucy told you of me; she told me of you too. May I make

first half-dozen of them are personal to me, and they will not horrify
you; then you will know me better. Dinner will by then be ready. In the
meantime I shall read over some of these documents, and shall be better

to my sitting-room and adjusted it for me. Now I shall learn something
pleasant, I am sure; for it will tell me the other side of a true love





_29 September._--I was so absorbed in that wonderful diary of Jonathan
Harker and that other of his wife that I let the time run on without
thinking. Mrs. Harker was not down when the maid came to announce

I went on with my work. I had just finished Mrs. Harker's diary, when
she came in. She looked sweetly pretty, but very sad, and her eyes were

cause for tears, God knows! but the relief of them was denied me; and
now the sight of those sweet eyes, brightened with recent tears, went


"I greatly fear I have distressed you."


than I can say by your grief. That is a wonderful machine, but it is
cruelly true. It told me, in its very tones, the anguish of your heart.
It was like a soul crying out to Almighty God. No one must hear them

words on my typewriter, and none other need now hear your heart beat, as


"No one need ever know, shall ever know," I said in a low voice. She


"Ah, but they must!"



"Because it is a part of the terrible story, a part of poor dear Lucy's

before us to rid the earth of this terrible monster we must have all
the knowledge and all the help which we can get. I think that the

but I can see that there are in your record many lights to this dark
mystery. You will let me help, will you not? I know all up to a certain

how poor Lucy was beset, and how her terrible doom was being wrought
out. Jonathan and I have been working day and night since Professor Van
Helsing saw us. He is gone to Whitby to get more information, and he

working together and with absolute trust, we can surely be stronger than
if some of us were in the dark." She looked at me so appealingly, and at

that I gave in at once to her wishes. "You shall," I said, "do as you
like in the matter. God forgive me if I do wrong! There are terrible

poor Lucy's death, you will not be content, I know, to remain in the
dark. Nay, the end--the very end--may give you a gleam of peace. Come,
there is dinner. We must keep one another strong for what is before us;

the rest, and I shall answer any questions you ask--if there be anything
which you do not understand, though it was apparent to us who were





_29 September._--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward to his study. He
brought back the phonograph from my room, and I took my typewriter. He

could touch it without getting up, and showed me how to stop it in case
I should want to pause. Then he very thoughtfully took a chair, with his

put the forked metal to my ears and listened.

When the terrible story of Lucy's death, and--and all that followed, was

fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward saw me he jumped up with a
horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case-bottle from a

me. My brain was all in a whirl, and only that there came through all
the multitude of horrors, the holy ray of light that my dear, dear Lucy

making a scene. It is all so wild, and mysterious, and strange that if I
had not known Jonathan's experience in Transylvania I could not have
believed. As it was, I didn't know what to believe, and so got out of my

typewriter, and said to Dr. Seward:--


when he comes. I have sent a telegram to Jonathan to come on here when
he arrives in London from Whitby. In this matter dates are everything,

put in chronological order, we shall have done much. You tell me that
Lord Godalming and Mr. Morris are coming too. Let us be able to tell him
when they come." He accordingly set the phonograph at a slow pace, and I

manifold, and so took three copies of the diary, just as I had done with
all the rest. It was late when I got through, but Dr. Seward went about

came back and sat near me, reading, so that I did not feel too lonely
whilst I worked. How good and thoughtful he is; the world seems full of

remembered what Jonathan put in his diary of the Professor's
perturbation at reading something in an evening paper at the station at
Exeter; so, seeing that Dr. Seward keeps his newspapers, I borrowed the

them to my room. I remember how much "The Dailygraph" and "The Whitby
Gazette," of which I had made cuttings, helped us to understand the

through the evening papers since then, and perhaps I shall get some new
light. I am not sleepy, and the work will help to keep me quiet.




_30 September._--Mr. Harker arrived at nine o'clock. He had got his

judge from his face, and full of energy. If this journal be true--and
judging by one's own wonderful experiences, it must be--he is also a man

remarkable piece of daring. After reading his account of it I was
prepared to meet a good specimen of manhood, but hardly the quiet,


       *       *       *       *       *


and as I passed a while ago I heard the click of the typewriter. They
are hard at it. Mrs. Harker says that they are knitting together in

the letters between the consignee of the boxes at Whitby and the
carriers in London who took charge of them. He is now reading his wife's

is....


     the Count's hiding-place! Goodness knows that we had enough clues
     from the conduct of the patient Renfield! The bundle of letters

     if we had only had them earlier we might have saved poor Lucy!
     Stop; that way madness lies! Harker has gone back, and is again

     able to show a whole connected narrative. He thinks that in the
     meantime I should see Renfield, as hitherto he has been a sort of
     index to the coming and going of the Count. I hardly see this yet,

     that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have


     I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with his hands
     folded, smiling benignly. At the moment he seemed as sane as any

     subjects, all of which he treated naturally. He then, of his own
     accord, spoke of going home, a subject he has never mentioned to my

     confidently of getting his discharge at once. I believe that, had I
     not had the chat with Harker and read the letters and the dates of
     his outbursts, I should have been prepared to sign for him after a

     those outbreaks were in some way linked with the proximity of the
     Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be that

     Stay; he is himself zoöphagous, and in his wild ravings outside the
     chapel door of the deserted house he always spoke of "master." This
     all seems confirmation of our idea. However, after a while I came

     safe to probe him too deep with questions. He might begin to think,
     and then--! So I came away. I mistrust these quiet moods of his; so

     have a strait-waistcoat ready in case of need.




_29 September, in train to London._--When I received Mr. Billington's
courteous message that he would give me any information in his power I

inquiries as I wanted. It was now my object to trace that horrid cargo
of the Count's to its place in London. Later, we may be able to deal

brought me to his father's house, where they had decided that I must
stay the night. They are hospitable, with true Yorkshire hospitality:
give a guest everything, and leave him free to do as he likes. They all

ready in his office all the papers concerning the consignment of boxes.
It gave me almost a turn to see again one of the letters which I had

Everything had been carefully thought out, and done systematically and
with precision. He seemed to have been prepared for every obstacle which

out. To use an Americanism, he had "taken no chances," and the absolute
accuracy with which his instructions were fulfilled, was simply the
logical result of his care. I saw the invoice, and took note of it:

Also the copy of letter to Carter Paterson, and their reply; of both of
these I got copies. This was all the information Mr. Billington could

officers and the harbour-master. They had all something to say of the
strange entry of the ship, which is already taking its place in local

of common earth." I then saw the station-master, who kindly put me in
communication with the men who had actually received the boxes. Their
tally was exact with the list, and they had nothing to add except that

work. One of them added that it was hard lines that there wasn't any
gentleman "such-like as yourself, squire," to show some sort of

that the thirst then generated was such that even the time which had
elapsed had not completely allayed it. Needless to add, I took care



       *       *       *       *       *

_30 September._--The station-master was good enough to give me a line to

arrived there in the morning I was able to ask him about the arrival of
the boxes. He, too, put me at once in communication with the proper

invoice. The opportunities of acquiring an abnormal thirst had been here
limited; a noble use of them had, however, been made, and again I was


From thence I went on to Carter Paterson's central office, where I met
with the utmost courtesy. They looked up the transaction in their
day-book and letter-book, and at once telephoned to their King's Cross

were waiting for work, and the official at once sent them over, sending
also by one of them the way-bill and all the papers connected with the

exactly; the carriers' men were able to supplement the paucity of the
written words with a few details. These were, I shortly found, connected
almost solely with the dusty nature of the job, and of the consequent

through the medium of the currency of the realm, of the allaying, at a
later period, this beneficial evil, one of the men remarked:--


ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was dust that thick in
the place that you might have slep' on it without 'urtin' of yer bones;

Jerusalem in it. But the ole chapel--that took the cike, that did! Me
and my mate, we thort we wouldn't never git out quick enough. Lor', I


Having been in the house, I could well believe him; but if he knew what
I know, he would, I think, have raised his terms.


Whitby from Varna in the _Demeter_ were safely deposited in the old
chapel at Carfax. There should be fifty of them there, unless any have


I shall try to see the carter who took away the boxes from Carfax when
Renfield attacked them. By following up this clue we may learn a good




_Later._--Mina and I have worked all day, and we have put all the papers





_30 September._--I am so glad that I hardly know how to contain myself.
It is, I suppose, the reaction from the haunting fear which I have had:

detrimentally on Jonathan. I saw him leave for Whitby with as brave a
face as I could, but I was sick with apprehension. The effort has,
however, done him good. He was never so resolute, never so strong, never

Professor Van Helsing said: he is true grit, and he improves under
strain that would kill a weaker nature. He came back full of life and

feel myself quite wild with excitement. I suppose one ought to pity any
thing so hunted as is the Count. That is just it: this Thing is not

death, and what followed, is enough to dry up the springs of pity in


       *       *       *       *       *


expected. Dr. Seward was out on business, and had taken Jonathan with
him, so I had to see them. It was to me a painful meeting, for it

course they had heard Lucy speak of me, and it seemed that Dr. Van
Helsing, too, has been quite "blowing my trumpet," as Mr. Morris

about the proposals they made to Lucy. They did not quite know what to
say or do, as they were ignorant of the amount of my knowledge; so they
had to keep on neutral subjects. However, I thought the matter over, and

them in affairs right up to date. I knew from Dr. Seward's diary that
they had been at Lucy's death--her real death--and that I need not fear

could, that I had read all the papers and diaries, and that my husband
and I, having typewritten them, had just finished putting them in order.
I gave them each a copy to read in the library. When Lord Godalming got


"Did you write all this, Mrs. Harker?"



"I don't quite see the drift of it; but you people are all so good and

I can do is to accept your ideas blindfold and try to help you. I have
had one lesson already in accepting facts that should make a man humble
to the last hour of his life. Besides, I know you loved my poor Lucy--"

the tears in his voice. Mr. Morris, with instinctive delicacy, just laid
a hand for a moment on his shoulder, and then walked quietly out of the

free to break down before her and express his feelings on the tender or
emotional side without feeling it derogatory to his manhood; for when

gave way utterly and openly. I sat down beside him and took his hand. I
hope he didn't think it forward of me, and that if he ever thinks of it
afterwards he never will have such a thought. There I wrong him; I

could see that his heart was breaking:--


her. She and I were like sisters; and now she is gone, will you not let
me be like a sister to you in your trouble? I know what sorrows you have
had, though I cannot measure the depth of them. If sympathy and pity can

Lucy's sake?"


to me that all that he had of late been suffering in silence found a
vent at once. He grew quite hysterical, and raising his open hands, beat

down again, and the tears rained down his cheeks. I felt an infinite
pity for him, and opened my arms unthinkingly. With a sob he laid his
head on my shoulder and cried like a wearied child, whilst he shook with



smaller matters when the mother-spirit is invoked; I felt this big
sorrowing man's head resting on me, as though it were that of the baby

were my own child. I never thought at the time how strange it all was.

After a little bit his sobs ceased, and he raised himself with an

days and nights past--weary days and sleepless nights--he had been
unable to speak with any one, as a man must speak in his time of
sorrow. There was no woman whose sympathy could be given to him, or with

surrounded, he could speak freely. "I know now how I suffered," he said,
as he dried his eyes, "but I do not know even yet--and none other can

know better in time; and believe me that, though I am not ungrateful
now, my gratitude will grow with my understanding. You will let me be


"For dear Lucy's sake," I said as we clasped hands. "Ay, and for your
own sake," he added, "for if a man's esteem and gratitude are ever worth
the winning, you have won mine to-day. If ever the future should bring

in vain. God grant that no such time may ever come to you to break the
sunshine of your life; but if it should ever come, promise me that you

I felt it would comfort him, so I said:--



As I came along the corridor I saw Mr. Morris looking out of a window.

my red eyes, he went on: "Ah, I see you have been comforting him. Poor
old fellow! he needs it. No one but a woman can help a man when he is in



manuscript in his hand, and I knew that when he read it he would realise


"I wish I could comfort all who suffer from the heart. Will you let me
be your friend, and will you come to me for comfort if you need it? You

stooping, took my hand, and raising it to his lips, kissed it. It seemed
but poor comfort to so brave and unselfish a soul, and impulsively I
bent over and kissed him. The tears rose in his eyes, and there was a


"Little girl, you will never regret that true-hearted kindness, so long
as ever you live!" Then he went into the study to his friend.







CHAPTER XVIII




_30 September._--I got home at five o'clock, and found that Godalming

of the various diaries and letters which Harker and his wonderful wife
had made and arranged. Harker had not yet returned from his visit to the

us a cup of tea, and I can honestly say that, for the first time since I
have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. When we had


"Dr. Seward, may I ask a favour? I want to see your patient, Mr.

interests me so much!" She looked so appealing and so pretty that I
could not refuse her, and there was no possible reason why I should; so
I took her with me. When I went into the room, I told the man that a


"She is going through the house, and wants to see every one in it," I
answered. "Oh, very well," he said; "let her come in, by all means; but

peculiar: he simply swallowed all the flies and spiders in the boxes
before I could stop him. It was quite evident that he feared, or was

task, he said cheerfully: "Let the lady come in," and sat down on the
edge of his bed with his head down, but with his eyelids raised so that
he could see her as she entered. For a moment I thought that he might

before he attacked me in my own study, and I took care to stand where I
could seize him at once if he attempted to make a spring at her. She

the respect of any lunatic--for easiness is one of the qualities mad
people most respect. She walked over to him, smiling pleasantly, and


"Good-evening, Mr. Renfield," said she. "You see, I know you, for Dr.

over intently with a set frown on his face. This look gave way to one
of wonder, which merged in doubt; then, to my intense astonishment, he


"You're not the girl the doctor wanted to marry, are you? You can't be,


"Oh no! I have a husband of my own, to whom I was married before I ever


"Then what are you doing here?"



"Then don't stay."


pleasant to Mrs. Harker, any more than it was to me, so I joined in:--

"How did you know I wanted to marry any one?" His reply was simply

Harker to me, instantly turning them back again:--



"I don't see that at all, Mr. Renfield," said Mrs. Harker, at once
championing me. He replied to her with as much courtesy and respect as


"You will, of course, understand, Mrs. Harker, that when a man is so

interest in our little community. Dr. Seward is loved not only by his
household and his friends, but even by his patients, who, being some of

effects. Since I myself have been an inmate of a lunatic asylum, I
cannot but notice that the sophistic tendencies of some of its inmates

positively opened my eyes at this new development. Here was my own pet
lunatic--the most pronounced of his type that I had ever met

gentleman. I wonder if it was Mrs. Harker's presence which had touched
some chord in his memory. If this new phase was spontaneous, or in any
way due to her unconscious influence, she must have some rare gift or



quite reasonable, she ventured, looking at me questioningly as she
began, to lead him to his favourite topic. I was again astonished, for

completest sanity; he even took himself as an example when he mentioned


"Why, I myself am an instance of a man who had a strange belief. Indeed,
it was no wonder that my friends were alarmed, and insisted on my being

perpetual entity, and that by consuming a multitude of live things, no
matter how low in the scale of creation, one might indefinitely prolong

take human life. The doctor here will bear me out that on one occasion I
tried to kill him for the purpose of strengthening my vital powers by
the assimilation with my own body of his life through the medium of his

the life.' Though, indeed, the vendor of a certain nostrum has
vulgarised the truism to the very point of contempt. Isn't that true,

either think or say; it was hard to imagine that I had seen him eat up
his spiders and flies not five minutes before. Looking at my watch, I
saw that I should go to the station to meet Van Helsing, so I told Mrs.

pleasantly to Mr. Renfield: "Good-bye, and I hope I may see you often,
under auspices pleasanter to yourself," to which, to my astonishment, he



May He bless and keep you!"


me. Poor Art seemed more cheerful than he has been since Lucy first took
ill, and Quincey is more like his own bright self than he has been for


Van Helsing stepped from the carriage with the eager nimbleness of a


"Ah, friend John, how goes all? Well? So! I have been busy, for I come
here to stay if need be. All affairs are settled with me, and I have

Arthur and my friend Quincey, they are with you, too? Good!"

As I drove to the house I told him of what had passed, and of how my own

which the Professor interrupted me:--

"Ah, that wonderful Madam Mina! She has man's brain--a brain that a man

fashioned her for a purpose, believe me, when He made that so good
combination. Friend John, up to now fortune has made that woman of help

affair. It is not good that she run a risk so great. We men are
determined--nay, are we not pledged?--to destroy this monster; but it is

in so much and so many horrors; and hereafter she may suffer--both in
waking, from her nerves, and in sleep, from her dreams. And, besides,
she is young woman and not so long married; there may be other things to

must consult with us; but to-morrow she say good-bye to this work, and
we go alone." I agreed heartily with him, and then I told him what we

the very next one to my own. He was amazed, and a great concern seemed
to come on him. "Oh that we had known it before!" he said, "for then we

that is spilt cries not out afterwards,' as you say. We shall not think
of that, but go on our way to the end." Then he fell into a silence that
lasted till we entered my own gateway. Before we went to prepare for


"I am told, Madam Mina, by my friend John that you and your husband have


"Not up to this moment, Professor," she said impulsively, "but up to


"But why not up to now? We have seen hitherto how good light all the
little things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who


Mrs. Harker began to blush, and taking a paper from her pockets, she



is my record of to-day. I too have seen the need of putting down at
present everything, however trivial; but there is little in this except
what is personal. Must it go in?" The Professor read it over gravely,


"It need not go in if you do not wish it; but I pray that it may. It can

honour you--as well as more esteem and love." She took it back with


And so now, up to this very hour, all the records we have are complete
and in order. The Professor took away one copy to study after dinner,

have already read everything; so when we meet in the study we shall all
be informed as to facts, and can arrange our plan of battle with this





_30 September._--When we met in Dr. Seward's study two hours after
dinner, which had been at six o'clock, we unconsciously formed a sort of
board or committee. Professor Van Helsing took the head of the table, to

next to him on his right, and asked me to act as secretary; Jonathan sat
next to me. Opposite us were Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and Mr.

centre. The Professor said:--


that are in these papers." We all expressed assent, and he went on:--

"Then it were, I think good that I tell you something of the kind of

something of the history of this man, which has been ascertained for me.
So we then can discuss how we shall act, and can take our measure


"There are such beings as vampires; some of us have evidence that they

teachings and the records of the past give proof enough for sane
peoples. I admit that at the first I was sceptic. Were it not that

have believe until such time as that fact thunder on my ear. 'See! see!
I prove; I prove.' Alas! Had I known at the first what now I know--nay,
had I even guess at him--one so precious life had been spared to many of

poor souls perish not, whilst we can save. The _nosferatu_ do not die
like the bee when he sting once. He is only stronger; and being

amongst us is of himself so strong in person as twenty men; he is of
cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of ages; he have

divination by the dead, and all the dead that he can come nigh to are
for him at command; he is brute, and more than brute; he is devil in

at will when, and where, and in any of the forms that are to him; he
can, within his range, direct the elements; the storm, the fog, the
thunder; he can command all the meaner things: the rat, and the owl, and

small; and he can at times vanish and come unknown. How then are we to
begin our strike to destroy him? How shall we find his where; and having

task that we undertake, and there may be consequence to make the brave
shudder. For if we fail in this our fight he must surely win; and then
where end we? Life is nothings; I heed him not. But to fail here, is not

become foul things of the night like him--without heart or conscience,
preying on the bodies and the souls of those we love best. To us for

We go on for all time abhorred by all; a blot on the face of God's
sunshine; an arrow in the side of Him who died for man. But we are face
to face with duty; and in such case must we shrink? For me, I say, no;

song of birds, his music and his love, lie far behind. You others are
young. Some have seen sorrow; but there are fair days yet in store. What



much, that the appalling nature of our danger was overcoming him when I
saw his hand stretch out; but it was life to me to feel its touch--so
strong, so self-reliant, so resolute. A brave man's hand can speak for


When the Professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, and I


"I answer for Mina and myself," he said.

"Count me in, Professor," said Mr. Quincey Morris, laconically as usual.




Dr. Seward simply nodded. The Professor stood up and, after laying his
golden crucifix on the table, held out his hand on either side. I took
his right hand, and Lord Godalming his left; Jonathan held my right with

solemn compact was made. I felt my heart icy cold, but it did not even
occur to me to draw back. We resumed our places, and Dr. Van Helsing

had begun. It was to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslike a way,
as any other transaction of life:--


without strength. We have on our side power of combination--a power
denied to the vampire kind; we have sources of science; we are free to

In fact, so far as our powers extend, they are unfettered, and we are
free to use them. We have self-devotion in a cause, and an end to


"Now let us see how far the general powers arrayed against us are
restrict, and how the individual cannot. In fine, let us consider the


"All we have to go upon are traditions and superstitions. These do not
at the first appear much, when the matter is one of life and death--nay

first place because we have to be--no other means is at our control--and
secondly, because, after all, these things--tradition and

others--though not, alas! for us--on them? A year ago which of us would
have received such a possibility, in the midst of our scientific,
sceptical, matter-of-fact nineteenth century? We even scouted a belief

vampire, and the belief in his limitations and his cure, rest for the
moment on the same base. For, let me tell you, he is known everywhere

all over, in France, in India, even in the Chernosese; and in China, so
far from us in all ways, there even is he, and the peoples fear him at

devil-begotten Hun, the Slav, the Saxon, the Magyar. So far, then, we
have all we may act upon; and let me tell you that very much of the

experience. The vampire live on, and cannot die by mere passing of the
time; he can flourish when that he can fatten on the blood of the
living. Even more, we have seen amongst us that he can even grow

they refresh themselves when his special pabulum is plenty. But he
cannot flourish without this diet; he eat not as others. Even friend

He throws no shadow; he make in the mirror no reflect, as again
Jonathan observe. He has the strength of many of his hand--witness again

from the diligence too. He can transform himself to wolf, as we gather
from the ship arrival in Whitby, when he tear open the dog; he can be as
bat, as Madam Mina saw him on the window at Whitby, and as friend John

the window of Miss Lucy. He can come in mist which he create--that noble
ship's captain proved him of this; but, from what we know, the distance

come on moonlight rays as elemental dust--as again Jonathan saw those
sisters in the castle of Dracula. He become so small--we ourselves saw
Miss Lucy, ere she was at peace, slip through a hairbreadth space at the

into anything, no matter how close it be bound or even fused up with
fire--solder you call it. He can see in the dark--no small power this,

through. He can do all these things, yet he is not free. Nay; he is even
more prisoner than the slave of the galley, than the madman in his cell.

some of nature's laws--why we know not. He may not enter anywhere at the
first, unless there be some one of the household who bid him to come;
though afterwards he can come as he please. His power ceases, as does

can he have limited freedom. If he be not at the place whither he is
bound, he can only change himself at noon or at exact sunrise or sunset.

inference. Thus, whereas he can do as he will within his limit, when he
have his earth-home, his coffin-home, his hell-home, the place

Whitby; still at other time he can only change when the time come. It is
said, too, that he can only pass running water at the slack or the flood
of the tide. Then there are things which so afflict him that he has no

symbol, my crucifix, that was amongst us even now when we resolve, to
them he is nothing, but in their presence he take his place far off and

lest in our seeking we may need them. The branch of wild rose on his
coffin keep him that he move not from it; a sacred bullet fired into the
coffin kill him so that he be true dead; and as for the stake through

We have seen it with our eyes.


him to his coffin and destroy him, if we obey what we know. But he is
clever. I have asked my friend Arminius, of Buda-Pesth University, to

has been. He must, indeed, have been that Voivode Dracula who won his
name against the Turk, over the great river on the very frontier of
Turkey-land. If it be so, then was he no common man; for in that time,

cunning, as well as the bravest of the sons of the 'land beyond the
forest.' That mighty brain and that iron resolution went with him to his

Arminius, a great and noble race, though now and again were scions who
were held by their coevals to have had dealings with the Evil One. They
learned his secrets in the Scholomance, amongst the mountains over Lake

records are such words as 'stregoica'--witch, 'ordog,' and
'pokol'--Satan and hell; and in one manuscript this very Dracula is

from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their
graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it

all good; in soil barren of holy memories it cannot rest."

Whilst they were talking Mr. Morris was looking steadily at the window,

pause, and then the Professor went on:--

"And now we must settle what we do. We have here much data, and we must

that from the castle to Whitby came fifty boxes of earth, all of which
were delivered at Carfax; we also know that at least some of these boxes

ascertain whether all the rest remain in the house beyond that wall
where we look to-day; or whether any more have been removed. If the


Here we were interrupted in a very startling way. Outside the house came

bullet, which, ricochetting from the top of the embrasure, struck the
far wall of the room. I am afraid I am at heart a coward, for I shrieked
out. The men all jumped to their feet; Lord Godalming flew over to the



"Sorry! I fear I have alarmed you. I shall come in and tell you about
it." A minute later he came in and said:--


Harker, most sincerely; I fear I must have frightened you terribly. But
the fact is that whilst the Professor was talking there came a big bat

brutes from recent events that I cannot stand them, and I went out to
have a shot, as I have been doing of late of evenings, whenever I have


"Did you hit it?" asked Dr. Van Helsing.


saying any more he took his seat, and the Professor began to resume his


"We must trace each of these boxes; and when we are ready, we must
either capture or kill this monster in his lair; or we must, so to

Thus in the end we may find him in his form of man between the hours of
noon and sunset, and so engage with him when he is at his most weak.


You are too precious to us to have such risk. When we part to-night, you
no more must question. We shall tell you all in good time. We are men
and are able to bear; but you must be our star and our hope, and we



All the men, even Jonathan, seemed relieved; but it did not seem to me
good that they should brave danger and, perhaps, lessen their

minds were made up, and, though it was a bitter pill for me to swallow,
I could say nothing, save to accept their chivalrous care of me.



"As there is no time to lose, I vote we have a look at his house right
now. Time is everything with him; and swift action on our part may save



close, but I did not say anything, for I had a greater fear that if I
appeared as a drag or a hindrance to their work, they might even leave
me out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax,


Manlike, they had told me to go to bed and sleep; as if a woman can

to sleep, lest Jonathan have added anxiety about me when he returns.




_1 October, 4 a. m._--Just as we were about to leave the house, an
urgent message was brought to me from Renfield to know if I would see

I told the messenger to say that I would attend to his wishes in the
morning; I was busy just at the moment. The attendant added:--


know but what, if you don't see him soon, he will have one of his
violent fits." I knew the man would not have said this without some

wait a few minutes for me, as I had to go and see my "patient."

"Take me with you, friend John," said the Professor. "His case in your
diary interest me much, and it had bearing, too, now and again on _our_



"May I come also?" asked Lord Godalming.


we all went down the passage together.

We found him in a state of considerable excitement, but far more

unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything I had ever
met with in a lunatic; and he took it for granted that his reasons would

none of the others at first said anything. His request was that I would
at once release him from the asylum and send him home. This he backed up
with arguments regarding his complete recovery, and adduced his own

perhaps, not mind sitting in judgment on my case. By the way, you have
not introduced me." I was so much astonished, that the oddness of

besides, there was a certain dignity in the man's manner, so much of
the habit of equality, that I at once made the introduction: "Lord

Renfield." He shook hands with each of them, saying in turn:--

"Lord Godalming, I had the honour of seconding your father at the

more. He was a man loved and honoured by all who knew him; and in his
youth was, I have heard, the inventor of a burnt rum punch, much

state. Its reception into the Union was a precedent which may have
far-reaching effects hereafter, when the Pole and the Tropics may hold

vast engine of enlargement, when the Monroe doctrine takes its true
place as a political fable. What shall any man say of his pleasure at
meeting Van Helsing? Sir, I make no apology for dropping all forms of

by his discovery of the continuous evolution of brain-matter,
conventional forms are unfitting, since they would seem to limit him to

the possession of natural gifts, are fitted to hold your respective
places in the moving world, I take to witness that I am as sane as at

And I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as
well as scientist, will deem it a moral duty to deal with me as one to
be considered as under exceptional circumstances." He made this last



I think we were all staggered. For my own part, I was under the
conviction, despite my knowledge of the man's character and history,

tell him that I was satisfied as to his sanity, and would see about the
necessary formalities for his release in the morning. I thought it

I knew the sudden changes to which this particular patient was liable.
So I contented myself with making a general statement that he appeared
to be improving very rapidly; that I would have a longer chat with him

meeting his wishes. This did not at all satisfy him, for he said


"But I fear, Dr. Seward, that you hardly apprehend my wish. I desire to
go at once--here--now--this very hour--this very moment, if I may. Time

the essence of the contract. I am sure it is only necessary to put
before so admirable a practitioner as Dr. Seward so simple, yet so

seeing the negative in my face, turned to the others, and scrutinised
them closely. Not meeting any sufficient response, he went on:--



"You have," I said frankly, but at the same time, as I felt, brutally.


"Then I suppose I must only shift my ground of request. Let me ask for
this concession--boon, privilege, what you will. I am content to implore
in such a case, not on personal grounds, but for the sake of others. I

assure you, take it from me that they are good ones, sound and
unselfish, and spring from the highest sense of duty. Could you look,

animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of
your friends." Again he looked at us all keenly. I had a growing

but yet another form or phase of his madness, and so determined to let
him go on a little longer, knowing from experience that he would, like
all lunatics, give himself away in the end. Van Helsing was gazing at

with the fixed concentration of his look. He said to Renfield in a tone
which did not surprise me at the time, but only when I thought of it


"Can you not tell frankly your real reason for wishing to be free
to-night? I will undertake that if you will satisfy even me--a stranger,

Seward will give you, at his own risk and on his own responsibility, the
privilege you seek." He shook his head sadly, and with a look of


"Come, sir, bethink yourself. You claim the privilege of reason in the
highest degree, since you seek to impress us with your complete

you are not yet released from medical treatment for this very defect. If
you will not help us in our effort to choose the wisest course, how can
we perform the duty which you yourself put upon us? Be wise, and help



"Dr. Van Helsing, I have nothing to say. Your argument is complete, and
if I were free to speak I should not hesitate a moment; but I am not my
own master in the matter. I can only ask you to trust me. If I am

time to end the scene, which was becoming too comically grave, so I went


"Come, my friends, we have work to do. Good-night."

As, however, I got near the door, a new change came over the patient. He

about to make another homicidal attack. My fears, however, were
groundless, for he held up his two hands imploringly, and made his

emotion was militating against him, by restoring us more to our old
relations, he became still more demonstrative. I glanced at Van Helsing,

fixed in my manner, if not more stern, and motioned to him that his
efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the same
constantly growing excitement in him when he had to make some request of

wanted a cat; and I was prepared to see the collapse into the same
sullen acquiescence on this occasion. My expectation was not realised,

quite a frantic condition. He threw himself on his knees, and held up
his hands, wringing them in plaintive supplication, and poured forth a

whole face and form expressive of the deepest emotion:--

"Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward, oh, let me implore you, to let me out

send keepers with me with whips and chains; let them take me in a
strait-waistcoat, manacled and leg-ironed, even to a gaol; but let me go

speaking from the depths of my heart--of my very soul. You don't know
whom you wrong, or how; and I may not tell. Woe is me! I may not tell.
By all you hold sacred--by all you hold dear--by your love that is

of this and save my soul from guilt! Can't you hear me, man? Can't you
understand? Will you never learn? Don't you know that I am sane and

for his soul? Oh, hear me! hear me! Let me go! let me go! let me go!"

I thought that the longer this went on the wilder he would get, and so



already. Get to your bed and try to behave more discreetly."

He suddenly stopped and looked at me intently for several moments. Then,

bed. The collapse had come, as on former occasion, just as I had


When I was leaving the room, last of our party, he said to me in a


"You will, I trust, Dr. Seward, do me the justice to bear in mind, later







JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL



mind, for I think I never saw Mina so absolutely strong and well. I am
so glad that she consented to hold back and let us men do the work.

all; but now that her work is done, and that it is due to her energy and
brains and foresight that the whole story is put together in such a way
that every point tells, she may well feel that her part is finished, and

little upset by the scene with Mr. Renfield. When we came away from his
room we were silent till we got back to the study. Then Mr. Morris said


"Say, Jack, if that man wasn't attempting a bluff, he is about the

serious purpose, and if he had, it was pretty rough on him not to get a
chance." Lord Godalming and I were silent, but Dr. Van Helsing added:--

"Friend John, you know more of lunatics than I do, and I'm glad of it,

hysterical outburst have given him free. But we live and learn, and in
our present task we must take no chance, as my friend Quincey would say.

dreamy kind of way:--


ordinary lunatic I would have taken my chance of trusting him; but he
seems so mixed up with the Count in an indexy kind of way that I am

he prayed with almost equal fervour for a cat, and then tried to tear my
throat out with his teeth. Besides, he called the Count 'lord and

That horrid thing has the wolves and the rats and his own kind to help
him, so I suppose he isn't above trying to use a respectable lunatic. He
certainly did seem earnest, though. I only hope we have done what is

help to unnerve a man." The Professor stepped over, and laying his hand



and terrible case; we can only do as we deem best. What else have we to
hope for, except the pity of the good God?" Lord Godalming had slipped

whistle, as he remarked:--


call." Having passed the wall, we took our way to the house, taking care
to keep in the shadows of the trees on the lawn when the moonlight shone
out. When we got to the porch the Professor opened his bag and took out

little groups, evidently one for each. Then he spoke:--


many kinds. Our enemy is not merely spiritual. Remember that he has the
strength of twenty men, and that, though our necks or our windpipes are
of the common kind--and therefore breakable or crushable--his are not

in all than him, can at certain times hold him; but they cannot hurt him
as we can be hurt by him. We must, therefore, guard ourselves from his
touch. Keep this near your heart"--as he spoke he lifted a little silver

flowers round your neck"--here he handed to me a wreath of withered
garlic blossoms--"for other enemies more mundane, this revolver and this

fasten to your breast; and for all, and above all at the last, this,
which we must not desecrate needless." This was a portion of Sacred

was similarly equipped. "Now," he said, "friend John, where are the
skeleton keys? If so that we can open the door, we need not break house


Dr. Seward tried one or two skeleton keys, his mechanical dexterity as a
surgeon standing him in good stead. Presently he got one to suit; after

clang, shot back. We pressed on the door, the rusty hinges creaked, and
it slowly opened. It was startlingly like the image conveyed to me in

the same idea seemed to strike the others, for with one accord they
shrank back. The Professor was the first to move forward, and stepped


"_In manus tuas, Domine!_" he said, crossing himself as he passed over

lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the road. The
Professor carefully tried the lock, lest we might not be able to open it
from within should we be in a hurry making our exit. Then we all lit our


The light from the tiny lamps fell in all sorts of odd forms, as the

shadows. I could not for my life get away from the feeling that there
was some one else amongst us. I suppose it was the recollection, so

experience in Transylvania. I think the feeling was common to us all,
for I noticed that the others kept looking over their shoulders at every


The whole place was thick with dust. The floor was seemingly inches
deep, except where there were recent footsteps, in which on holding down
my lamp I could see marks of hobnails where the dust was cracked. The

spider's webs, whereon the dust had gathered till they looked like old
tattered rags as the weight had torn them partly down. On a table in the

had been used several times, for on the table were several similar rents
in the blanket of dust, similar to that exposed when the Professor


"You know this place, Jonathan. You have copied maps of it, and you know
it at least more than we do. Which is the way to the chapel?" I had an

get admission to it; so I led the way, and after a few wrong turnings
found myself opposite a low, arched oaken door, ribbed with iron bands.
"This is the spot," said the Professor as he turned his lamp on a small

regarding the purchase. With a little trouble we found the key on the
bunch and opened the door. We were prepared for some unpleasantness, for

through the gaps, but none of us ever expected such an odour as we
encountered. None of the others had met the Count at all at close

his existence in his rooms or, when he was gloated with fresh blood, in
a ruined building open to the air; but here the place was small and
close, and the long disuse had made the air stagnant and foul. There was

air. But as to the odour itself, how shall I describe it? It was not
alone that it was composed of all the ills of mortality and with the

become itself corrupt. Faugh! it sickens me to think of it. Every breath
exhaled by that monster seemed to have clung to the place and


Under ordinary circumstances such a stench would have brought our

terrible purpose in which we were involved gave us a strength which rose
above merely physical considerations. After the involuntary shrinking
consequent on the first nauseous whiff, we one and all set about our


We made an accurate examination of the place, the Professor saying as we


"The first thing is to see how many of the boxes are left; we must then

clue as to what has become of the rest." A glance was sufficient to show
how many remained, for the great earth chests were bulky, and there was


There were only twenty-nine left out of the fifty! Once I got a fright,

door into the dark passage beyond, I looked too, and for an instant my
heart stood still. Somewhere, looking out from the shadow, I seemed to
see the high lights of the Count's evil face, the ridge of the nose, the

as Lord Godalming said, "I thought I saw a face, but it was only the
shadows," and resumed his inquiry, I turned my lamp in the direction,

were no corners, no doors, no aperture of any kind, but only the solid
walls of the passage, there could be no hiding-place even for _him_. I


A few minutes later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which
he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for
undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we saw a whole mass

back. The whole place was becoming alive with rats.

For a moment or two we stood appalled, all save Lord Godalming, who was

iron-bound oaken door, which Dr. Seward had described from the outside,
and which I had seen myself, he turned the key in the lock, drew the

whistle from his pocket, he blew a low, shrill call. It was answered
from behind Dr. Seward's house by the yelping of dogs, and after about a

Unconsciously we had all moved towards the door, and as we moved I
noticed that the dust had been much disturbed: the boxes which had been
taken out had been brought this way. But even in the minute that had

swarm over the place all at once, till the lamplight, shining on their
moving dark bodies and glittering, baleful eyes, made the place look

threshold suddenly stopped and snarled, and then, simultaneously lifting
their noses, began to howl in most lugubrious fashion. The rats were


Lord Godalming lifted one of the dogs, and carrying him in, placed him
on the floor. The instant his feet touched the ground he seemed to

him so fast that before he had shaken the life out of a score, the other
dogs, who had by now been lifted in the same manner, had but small prey


With their going it seemed as if some evil presence had departed, for
the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at

the air with vicious shakes. We all seemed to find our spirits rise.
Whether it was the purifying of the deadly atmosphere by the opening of

in the open I know not; but most certainly the shadow of dread seemed to
slip from us like a robe, and the occasion of our coming lost something

resolution. We closed the outer door and barred and locked it, and
bringing the dogs with us, began our search of the house. We found

untouched save for my own footsteps when I had made my first visit.
Never once did the dogs exhibit any symptom of uneasiness, and even when
we returned to the chapel they frisked about as though they had been


The morning was quickening in the east when we emerged from the front.

locked the door in orthodox fashion, putting the key into his pocket


"So far," he said, "our night has been eminently successful. No harm has
come to us such as I feared might be and yet we have ascertained how

first--and perhaps our most difficult and dangerous--step has been
accomplished without the bringing thereinto our most sweet Madam Mina or

smells of horror which she might never forget. One lesson, too, we have
learned, if it be allowable to argue _a particulari_: that the brute
beasts which are to the Count's command are yet themselves not amenable

call, just as from his castle top he summon the wolves to your going and
to that poor mother's cry, though they come to him, they run pell-mell

before us, other dangers, other fears; and that monster--he has not used
his power over the brute world for the only or the last time to-night.

to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for the
stake of human souls. And now let us go home. The dawn is close at hand,
and we have reason to be content with our first night's work. It may be

but we must go on, and from no danger shall we shrink."

The house was silent when we got back, save for some poor creature who

from Renfield's room. The poor wretch was doubtless torturing himself,
after the manner of the insane, with needless thoughts of pain.


softly that I had to put my ear down to hear it. She looks paler than
usual. I hope the meeting to-night has not upset her. I am truly

deliberations. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not
think so at first, but I know better now. Therefore I am glad that it is
settled. There may be things which would frighten her to hear; and yet

suspected that there was any concealment. Henceforth our work is to be a
sealed book to her, till at least such time as we can tell her that all

daresay it will be difficult to begin to keep silence after such
confidence as ours; but I must be resolute, and to-morrow I shall keep
dark over to-night's doings, and shall refuse to speak of anything that


       *       *       *       *       *


overslept ourselves, for the day was a busy one, and the night had no
rest at all. Even Mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though I slept

three times before she awoke. Indeed, she was so sound asleep that for a
few seconds she did not recognize me, but looked at me with a sort of
blank terror, as one looks who has been waked out of a bad dream. She

day. We now know of twenty-one boxes having been removed, and if it be
that several were taken in any of these removals we may be able to trace

sooner the matter is attended to the better. I shall look up Thomas



_Dr. Seward's Diary._


walking into my room. He was more jolly and cheerful than usual, and it
is quite evident that last night's work has helped to take some of the

night he suddenly said:--


this morning? Or if that you are too occupy, I can go alone if it may
be. It is a new experience to me to find a lunatic who talk philosophy,

that if he would go alone I would be glad, as then I should not have to
keep him waiting; so I called an attendant and gave him the necessary
instructions. Before the Professor left the room I cautioned him against

want him to talk of himself and of his delusion as to consuming live
things. He said to Madam Mina, as I see in your diary of yesterday, that


"Excuse me," I said, "but the answer is here." I laid my hand on the
type-written matter. "When our sane and learned lunatic made that very

nauseous with the flies and spiders which he had eaten just before Mrs.
Harker entered the room." Van Helsing smiled in turn. "Good!" he said.
"Your memory is true, friend John. I should have remembered. And yet it

such a fascinating study. Perhaps I may gain more knowledge out of the
folly of this madman than I shall from the teaching of the most wise.

hand. It seemed that the time had been very short indeed, but there was
Van Helsing back in the study. "Do I interrupt?" he asked politely as he


"Not at all," I answered. "Come in. My work is finished, and I am free.


"It is needless; I have seen him!"




When I entered his room he was sitting on a stool in the centre, with
his elbows on his knees, and his face was the picture of sullen

measure of respect as I could assume. He made no reply whatever. "Don't
you know me?" I asked. His answer was not reassuring: "I know you well
enough; you are the old fool Van Helsing. I wish you would take yourself

Dutchmen!" Not a word more would he say, but sat in his implacable
sullenness as indifferent to me as though I had not been in the room at

clever lunatic; so I shall go, if I may, and cheer myself with a few
happy words with that sweet soul Madam Mina. Friend John, it does

worried with our terrible things. Though we shall much miss her help, it


"I agree with you with all my heart," I answered earnestly, for I did
not want him to weaken in this matter. "Mrs. Harker is better out of it.

been in many tight places in our time; but it is no place for a woman,
and if she had remained in touch with the affair, it would in time


So Van Helsing has gone to confer with Mrs. Harker and Harker; Quincey

shall finish my round of work and we shall meet to-night.




_1 October._--It is strange to me to be kept in the dark as I am to-day;
after Jonathan's full confidence for so many years, to see him

morning I slept late after the fatigues of yesterday, and though
Jonathan was late too, he was the earlier. He spoke to me before he went
out, never more sweetly or tenderly, but he never mentioned a word of

have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it
must have distressed him even more than it did me. They all agreed that

I acquiesced. But to think that he keeps anything from me! And now I am
crying like a silly fool, when I _know_ it comes from my husband's great


That has done me good. Well, some day Jonathan will tell me all; and
lest it should ever be that he should think for a moment that I kept
anything from him, I still keep my journal as usual. Then if he has

heart put down for his dear eyes to read. I feel strangely sad and
low-spirited to-day. I suppose it is the reaction from the terrible



me to. I didn't feel sleepy, and I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I
kept thinking over everything that has been ever since Jonathan came to
see me in London, and it all seems like a horrible tragedy, with fate

seems, no matter how right it may be, to bring on the very thing which
is most to be deplored. If I hadn't gone to Whitby, perhaps poor dear

till I came, and if she hadn't come there in the day-time with me she
wouldn't have walked there in her sleep; and if she hadn't gone there at
night and asleep, that monster couldn't have destroyed her as he did.

has come over me to-day. I must hide it from Jonathan, for if he knew
that I had been crying twice in one morning--I, who never cried on my

fellow would fret his heart out. I shall put a bold face on, and if I do
feel weepy, he shall never see it. I suppose it is one of the lessons


I can't quite remember how I fell asleep last night. I remember hearing
the sudden barking of the dogs and a lot of queer sounds, like praying

under this. And then there was silence over everything, silence so
profound that it startled me, and I got up and looked out of the window.

seeming full of a silent mystery of their own. Not a thing seemed to be
stirring, but all to be grim and fixed as death or fate; so that a thin

across the grass towards the house, seemed to have a sentience and a
vitality of its own. I think that the digression of my thoughts must

creeping over me. I lay a while, but could not quite sleep, so I got out
and looked out of the window again. The mist was spreading, and was now
close up to the house, so that I could see it lying thick against the

more loud than ever, and though I could not distinguish a word he said,
I could in some way recognise in his tones some passionate entreaty on

attendants were dealing with him. I was so frightened that I crept into
bed, and pulled the clothes over my head, putting my fingers in my ears.
I was not then a bit sleepy, at least so I thought; but I must have

morning, when Jonathan woke me. I think that it took me an effort and a
little time to realise where I was, and that it was Jonathan who was

the way that waking thoughts become merged in, or continued in, dreams.

I thought that I was asleep, and waiting for Jonathan to come back. I
was very anxious about him, and I was powerless to act; my feet, and my

usual pace. And so I slept uneasily and thought. Then it began to dawn
upon me that the air was heavy, and dank, and cold. I put back the

around. The gaslight which I had left lit for Jonathan, but turned down,
came only like a tiny red spark through the fog, which had evidently

had shut the window before I had come to bed. I would have got out to
make certain on the point, but some leaden lethargy seemed to chain my
limbs and even my will. I lay still and endured; that was all. I closed

tricks our dreams play us, and how conveniently we can imagine.) The
mist grew thicker and thicker and I could see now how it came in, for I

water--pouring in, not through the window, but through the joinings of
the door. It got thicker and thicker, till it seemed as if it became

of which I could see the light of the gas shining like a red eye. Things
began to whirl through my brain just as the cloudy column was now
whirling in the room, and through it all came the scriptural words "a

spiritual guidance that was coming to me in my sleep? But the pillar was
composed of both the day and the night-guiding, for the fire was in the

looked, the fire divided, and seemed to shine on me through the fog like
two red eyes, such as Lucy told me of in her momentary mental wandering
when, on the cliff, the dying sunlight struck the windows of St. Mary's

had seen those awful women growing into reality through the whirling mist
in the moonlight, and in my dream I must have fainted, for all became

show me a livid white face bending over me out of the mist. I must be
careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one's reason if there were
too much of them. I would get Dr. Van Helsing or Dr. Seward to prescribe

them. Such a dream at the present time would become woven into their
fears for me. To-night I shall strive hard to sleep naturally. If I do

cannot hurt me for once, and it will give me a good night's sleep. Last
night tired me more than if I had not slept at all.



_2 October 10 p. m._--Last night I slept, but did not dream. I must have
slept soundly, for I was not waked by Jonathan coming to bed; but the

spiritless. I spent all yesterday trying to read, or lying down dozing.
In the afternoon Mr. Renfield asked if he might see me. Poor man, he was

me. Some way it affected me much; I am crying when I think of him. This
is a new weakness, of which I must be careful. Jonathan would be

dinner-time, and they all came in tired. I did what I could to brighten
them up, and I suppose that the effort did me good, for I forgot how
tired I was. After dinner they sent me to bed, and all went off to smoke

of what had occurred to each during the day; I could see from Jonathan's
manner that he had something important to communicate. I was not so

give me a little opiate of some kind, as I had not slept well the night
before. He very kindly made me up a sleeping draught, which he gave to
me, telling me that it would do me no harm, as it was very mild.... I

I have not done wrong, for as sleep begins to flirt with me, a new fear
comes: that I may have been foolish in thus depriving myself of the







JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL



Green, but unhappily he was not in a condition to remember anything. The
very prospect of beer which my expected coming had opened to him had
proved too much, and he had begun too early on his expected debauch. I

was only the assistant to Smollet, who of the two mates was the
responsible person. So off I drove to Walworth, and found Mr. Joseph

saucer. He is a decent, intelligent fellow, distinctly a good, reliable
type of workman, and with a headpiece of his own. He remembered all

notebook, which he produced from some mysterious receptacle about the
seat of his trousers, and which had hieroglyphical entries in thick,
half-obliterated pencil, he gave me the destinations of the boxes. There

197, Chicksand Street, Mile End New Town, and another six which he
deposited at Jamaica Lane, Bermondsey. If then the Count meant to

chosen as the first of delivery, so that later he might distribute more
fully. The systematic manner in which this was done made me think that

fixed on the far east of the northern shore, on the east of the southern
shore, and on the south. The north and west were surely never meant to
be left out of his diabolical scheme--let alone the City itself and the

to Smollet, and asked him if he could tell us if any other boxes had




"Well, guv'nor, you've treated me wery 'an'some"--I had given him half a
sovereign--"an' I'll tell yer all I know. I heard a man by the name of
Bloxam say four nights ago in the 'Are an' 'Ounds, in Pincher's Alley,

Purfect. There ain't a-many such jobs as this 'ere, an' I'm thinkin'
that maybe Sam Bloxam could tell ye summut." I asked if he could tell me

would be worth another half-sovereign to him. So he gulped down the rest
of his tea and stood up, saying that he was going to begin the search


"Look 'ere, guv'nor, there ain't no sense in me a-keepin' you 'ere. I
may find Sam soon, or I mayn't; but anyhow he ain't like to be in a way

If you can give me a envelope with a stamp on it, and put yer address on
it, I'll find out where Sam is to be found and post it ye to-night. But
ye'd better be up arter 'im soon in the mornin', or maybe ye won't ketch


This was all practical, so one of the children went off with a penny to
buy an envelope and a sheet of paper, and to keep the change. When she
came back, I addressed the envelope and stamped it, and when Smollet had

to home. We're on the track anyhow. I am tired to-night, and want sleep.
Mina is fast asleep, and looks a little too pale; her eyes look as

kept in the dark, and it may make her doubly anxious about me and the
others. But it is best as it is. It is better to be disappointed and

were quite right to insist on her being kept out of this dreadful
business. I must be firm, for on me this particular burden of silence

circumstances. Indeed, it may not be a hard task, after all, for she
herself has become reticent on the subject, and has not spoken of the


       *       *       *       *       *

_2 October, evening._--A long and trying and exciting day. By the first

which was written with a carpenter's pencil in a sprawling hand:--

"Sam Bloxam, Korkrans, 4, Poters Cort, Bartel Street, Walworth. Arsk for


I got the letter in bed, and rose without waking Mina. She looked heavy

but that, when I should return from this new search, I would arrange for
her going back to Exeter. I think she would be happier in our own home,

in ignorance. I only saw Dr. Seward for a moment, and told him where I
was off to, promising to come back and tell the rest so soon as I should
have found out anything. I drove to Walworth and found, with some

for Poter's Court instead of Potter's Court. However, when I had found
the court, I had no difficulty in discovering Corcoran's lodging-house.

head, and said: "I dunno 'im. There ain't no such a person 'ere; I never
'eard of 'im in all my bloomin' days. Don't believe there ain't nobody
of that kind livin' ere or anywheres." I took out Smollet's letter, and

of the court might guide me. "What are you?" I asked.

"I'm the depity," he answered. I saw at once that I was on the right

deputy's knowledge at my disposal, and I learned that Mr. Bloxam, who
had slept off the remains of his beer on the previous night at

morning. He could not tell me where the place of work was situated, but
he had a vague idea that it was some kind of a "new-fangled ware'us";

o'clock before I got any satisfactory hint of such a building, and this
I got at a coffee-shop, where some workmen were having their dinner. One
of these suggested that there was being erected at Cross Angel Street a

"new-fangled ware'us," I at once drove to it. An interview with a surly
gatekeeper and a surlier foreman, both of whom were appeased with the

suggesting that I was willing to pay his day's wages to his foreman for
the privilege of asking him a few questions on a private matter. He was
a smart enough fellow, though rough of speech and bearing. When I had

that he had made two journeys between Carfax and a house in Piccadilly,
and had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes--"main

asked him if he could tell me the number of the house in Piccadilly, to


"Well, guv'nor, I forgits the number, but it was only a few doors from a
big white church or somethink of the kind, not long built. It was a

tooked the bloomin' boxes from."



"There was the old party what engaged me a-waitin' in the 'ouse at
Purfleet. He 'elped me to lift the boxes and put them in the dray. Curse

with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw


How this phrase thrilled through me!


me a-puffin' an' a-blowin' afore I could up-end mine anyhow--an' I'm no


"How did you get into the house in Piccadilly?" I asked.

"He was there too. He must 'a' started off and got there afore me, for

to carry the boxes into the 'all."



"Yus; there was five in the first load an' four in the second. It was



"Were the boxes left in the hall?"

"Yus; it was a big 'all, an' there was nothin' else in it." I made one




"Never used no key nor nothink. The old gent, he opened the door 'isself
an' shut it again when I druv off. I don't remember the last time--but




"No, sir. But ye needn't have no difficulty about that. It's a 'igh 'un
with a stone front with a bow on it, an' 'igh steps up to the door. I

what come round to earn a copper. The old gent give them shillin's, an'
they seein' they got so much, they wanted more; but 'e took one of them
by the shoulder and was like to throw 'im down the steps, till the lot

find the house, so, having paid my friend for his information, I started
off for Piccadilly. I had gained a new painful experience; the Count

precious; for, now that he had achieved a certain amount of
distribution, he could, by choosing his own time, complete the task

westward; beyond the Junior Constitutional I came across the house
described, and was satisfied that this was the next of the lairs

untenanted. The windows were encrusted with dust, and the shutters were
up. All the framework was black with time, and from the iron the paint

a large notice-board in front of the balcony; it had, however, been
roughly torn away, the uprights which had supported it still remaining.
Behind the rails of the balcony I saw there were some loose boards,

been able to see the notice-board intact, as it would, perhaps, have
given some clue to the ownership of the house. I remembered my

but feel that if I could find the former owner there might be some means


There was at present nothing to be learned from the Piccadilly side, and
nothing could be done; so I went round to the back to see if anything
could be gathered from this quarter. The mews were active, the

grooms and helpers whom I saw around if they could tell me anything
about the empty house. One of them said that he heard it had lately been

very lately there had been a notice-board of "For Sale" up, and that
perhaps Mitchell, Sons, & Candy, the house agents, could tell me

the board. I did not wish to seem too eager, or to let my informant know
or guess too much, so, thanking him in the usual manner, I strolled
away. It was now growing dusk, and the autumn night was closing in, so I

Candy from a directory at the Berkeley, I was soon at their office in


The gentleman who saw me was particularly suave in manner, but

Piccadilly house--which throughout our interview he called a
"mansion"--was sold, he considered my business as concluded. When I

paused a few seconds before replying:--



"Pardon me," I said, with equal politeness, "but I have a special reason


Again he paused longer, and raised his eyebrows still more. "It is sold,


"Surely," I said, "you do not mind letting me know so much."

"But I do mind," he answered. "The affairs of their clients are

manifestly a prig of the first water, and there was no use arguing with
him. I thought I had best meet him on his own ground, so I said:--


confidence. I am myself a professional man." Here I handed him my card.
"In this instance I am not prompted by curiosity; I act on the part of

he understood, lately for sale." These words put a different complexion


"I would like to oblige you if I could, Mr. Harker, and especially would
I like to oblige his lordship. We once carried out a small matter of

Holmwood. If you will let me have his lordship's address I will consult
the House on the subject, and will, in any case, communicate with his
lordship by to-night's post. It will be a pleasure if we can so far



I wanted to secure a friend, and not to make an enemy, so I thanked him,
gave the address at Dr. Seward's and came away. It was now dark, and I

and came down to Purfleet by the next train.

I found all the others at home. Mina was looking tired and pale, but she

think that I had had to keep anything from her and so caused her
inquietude. Thank God, this will be the last night of her looking on at

confidence. It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of
keeping her out of our grim task. She seems somehow more reconciled; or

any accidental allusion is made she actually shudders. I am glad we
made our resolution in time, as with such a feeling as this, our growing


I could not tell the others of the day's discovery till we were alone;
so after dinner--followed by a little music to save appearances even

The dear girl was more affectionate with me than ever, and clung to me
as though she would detain me; but there was much to be talked of and I

difference between us.


the study. In the train I had written my diary so far, and simply read
it off to them as the best means of letting them get abreast of my own


"This has been a great day's work, friend Jonathan. Doubtless we are on
the track of the missing boxes. If we find them all in that house, then
our work is near the end. But if there be some missing, we must search

wretch to his real death." We all sat silent awhile and all at once Mr.


"Say! how are we going to get into that house?"



"But, Art, this is different. We broke house at Carfax, but we had night
and a walled park to protect us. It will be a mighty different thing to

see how we are going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key
of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the

about the room. By-and-by he stopped and said, turning from one to


"Quincey's head is level. This burglary business is getting serious; we
got off once all right; but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we


As nothing could well be done before morning, and as it would be at
least advisable to wait till Lord Godalming should hear from Mitchell's,

while we sat and smoked, discussing the matter in its various lights and
bearings; I took the opportunity of bringing this diary right up to the


Just a line. Mina sleeps soundly and her breathing is regular. Her
forehead is puckered up into little wrinkles, as though she thinks even

did this morning. To-morrow will, I hope, mend all this; she will be



_Dr. Seward's Diary._


rapidly that I find it difficult to keep touch of them, and as they
always mean something more than his own well-being, they form a more
than interesting study. This morning, when I went to see him after his

He was, in fact, commanding destiny--subjectively. He did not really
care for any of the things of mere earth; he was in the clouds and

thought I would improve the occasion and learn something, so I asked


"What about the flies these times?" He smiled on me in quite a superior

he answered me:--


of the aërial powers of the psychic faculties. The ancients did well
when they typified the soul as a butterfly!"




"Oh, it is a soul you are after now, is it?" His madness foiled his
reason, and a puzzled look spread over his face as, shaking his head


"Oh, no, oh no! I want no souls. Life is all I want." Here he brightened
up; "I am pretty indifferent about it at present. Life is all right; I

study zoöphagy!"



"Then you command life; you are a god, I suppose?" He smiled with an


"Oh no! Far be it from me to arrogate to myself the attributes of the
Deity. I am not even concerned in His especially spiritual doings. If I

purely terrestrial, somewhat in the position which Enoch occupied
spiritually!" This was a poser to me. I could not at the moment recall

that by so doing I was lowering myself in the eyes of the lunatic:--



"Because he walked with God." I could not see the analogy, but did not
like to admit it; so I harked back to what he had denied:--


my question quickly and somewhat sternly, on purpose to disconcert him.
The effort succeeded; for an instant he unconsciously relapsed into his

he replied:--


I had them; they would be no manner of use to me. I couldn't eat them
or----" He suddenly stopped and the old cunning look spread over his

life, what is it after all? When you've got all you require, and you
know that you will never want, that is all. I have friends--good

inexpressible cunning. "I know that I shall never lack the means of


I think that through the cloudiness of his insanity he saw some

he--a dogged silence. After a short time I saw that for the present it
was useless to speak to him. He was sulky, and so I came away.

Later in the day he sent for me. Ordinarily I would not have come

that I would gladly make an effort. Besides, I am glad to have anything
to help to pass the time. Harker is out, following up clues; and so are

record prepared by the Harkers; he seems to think that by accurate
knowledge of all details he will light upon some clue. He does not wish

me to see the patient, only I thought that after his last repulse he
might not care to go again. There was also another reason: Renfield
might not speak so freely before a third person as when he and I were



which is generally indicative of some mental energy on his part. When I
came in, he said at once, as though the question had been waiting on his


"What about souls?" It was evident then that my surmise had been

lunatic. I determined to have the matter out. "What about them
yourself?" I asked. He did not reply for a moment but looked all round



"I don't want any souls!" he said in a feeble, apologetic way. The
matter seemed preying on his mind, and so I determined to use it--to "be


"You like life, and you want life?"



"But," I asked, "how are we to get the life without getting the soul


"A nice time you'll have some time when you're flying out there, with
the souls of thousands of flies and spiders and birds and cats buzzing
and twittering and miauing all round you. You've got their lives, you

his imagination, for he put his fingers to his ears and shut his eyes,
screwing them up tightly just as a small boy does when his face is being

me a lesson, for it seemed that before me was a child--only a child,
though the features were worn, and the stubble on the jaws was white. It
was evident that he was undergoing some process of mental disturbance,

to himself, I thought I would enter into his mind as well as I could and
go with him. The first step was to restore confidence, so I asked him,



wake up all at once, and shook his head. With a laugh he replied:--

"Not much! flies are poor things, after all!" After a pause he added,


"Or spiders?" I went on.


to eat or"--he stopped suddenly, as though reminded of a forbidden


"So, so!" I thought to myself, "this is the second time he has suddenly

aware of having made a lapse, for he hurried on, as though to distract


"I don't take any stock at all in such matters. 'Rats and mice and such
small deer,' as Shakespeare has it, 'chicken-feed of the larder' they
might be called. I'm past all that sort of nonsense. You might as well

interest me about the lesser carnivora, when I know of what is before


"I see," I said. "You want big things that you can make your teeth meet


"What ridiculous nonsense you are talking!" He was getting too wide

reflectively, "what an elephant's soul is like!"

The effect I desired was obtained, for he at once fell from his


"I don't want an elephant's soul, or any soul at all!" he said. For a

his eyes blazing and all the signs of intense cerebral excitement. "To
hell with you and your souls!" he shouted. "Why do you plague me about
souls? Haven't I got enough to worry, and pain, and distract me already,

in for another homicidal fit, so I blew my whistle. The instant,
however, that I did so he became calm, and said apologetically:--


worried in my mind that I am apt to be irritable. If you only knew the
problem I have to face, and that I am working out, you would pity, and

want to think and I cannot think freely when my body is confined. I am
sure you will understand!" He had evidently self-control; so when the
attendants came I told them not to mind, and they withdrew. Renfield



"Dr. Seward, you have been very considerate towards me. Believe me that
I am very, very grateful to you!" I thought it well to leave him in this
mood, and so I came away. There is certainly something to ponder over in

interviewer calls "a story," if one could only get them in proper order.






Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future.


haunted by their souls.


that he will acquire some higher life. He dreads the consequence--the
burden of a soul. Then it is a human life he looks to!



Merciful God! the Count has been to him, and there is some new scheme of




_Later._--I went after my round to Van Helsing and told him my

while asked me to take him to Renfield. I did so. As we came to the door
we heard the lunatic within singing gaily, as he used to do in the time
which now seems so long ago. When we entered we saw with amazement that

autumn, were beginning to buzz into the room. We tried to make him talk
of the subject of our previous conversation, but he would not attend. He

got a scrap of paper and was folding it into a note-book. We had to come
away as ignorant as we went in.




_Letter, Mitchell, Sons and Candy to Lord Godalming._





"We are at all times only too happy to meet your wishes. We beg, with

behalf, to supply the following information concerning the sale and
purchase of No. 347, Piccadilly. The original vendors are the executors

nobleman, Count de Ville, who effected the purchase himself paying the
purchase money in notes 'over the counter,' if your Lordship will pardon
us using so vulgar an expression. Beyond this we know nothing whatever












make an accurate note of any sound he might hear from Renfield's room,
and gave him instructions that if there should be anything strange he
was to call me. After dinner, when we had all gathered round the fire

and discoveries of the day. Harker was the only one who had any result,
and we are in great hopes that his clue may be an important one.


through the observation trap. He was sleeping soundly, and his heart


This morning the man on duty reported to me that a little after midnight
he was restless and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. I asked him
if that was all; he replied that it was all he heard. There was

he had been asleep. He denied sleep, but admitted to having "dozed" for
a while. It is too bad that men cannot be trusted unless they are



looking after horses. Godalming thinks that it will be well to have
horses always in readiness, for when we get the information which we
seek there will be no time to lose. We must sterilise all the imported

weakest, and without a refuge to fly to. Van Helsing is off to the
British Museum looking up some authorities on ancient medicine. The old

and the Professor is searching for witch and demon cures which may be


I sometimes think we must be all mad and that we shall wake to sanity in


       *       *       *       *       *


work of to-morrow may be the beginning of the end. I wonder if
Renfield's quiet has anything to do with this. His moods have so

monster may be carried to him in some subtle way. If we could only get
some hint as to what passed in his mind, between the time of my argument

valuable clue. He is now seemingly quiet for a spell.... Is he?---- That
wild yell seemed to come from his room....



The attendant came bursting into my room and told me that Renfield had
somehow met with some accident. He had heard him yell; and when he went






CHAPTER XXI




_3 October._--Let me put down with exactness all that happened, as well

can recall must be forgotten; in all calmness I must proceed.

When I came to Renfield's room I found him lying on the floor on his

became at once apparent that he had received some terrible injuries;
there seemed none of that unity of purpose between the parts of the body

that it was horribly bruised, as though it had been beaten against the
floor--indeed it was from the face wounds that the pool of blood

we turned him over:--


the whole side of his face are paralysed." How such a thing could have
happened puzzled the attendant beyond measure. He seemed quite


"I can't understand the two things. He could mark his face like that by
beating his own head on the floor. I saw a young woman do it once at the
Eversfield Asylum before anyone could lay hands on her. And I suppose he

kink. But for the life of me I can't imagine how the two things
occurred. If his back was broke, he couldn't beat his head; and if his

it." I said to him:--


him without an instant's delay." The man ran off, and within a few
minutes the Professor, in his dressing gown and slippers, appeared. When

then turned to me. I think he recognised my thought in my eyes, for he
said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:--


attention. I shall stay with you myself; but I shall first dress myself.
If you will remain I shall in a few minutes join you."


he had suffered some terrible injury. Van Helsing returned with
extraordinary celerity, bearing with him a surgical case. He had

looked at the patient, he whispered to me:--

"Send the attendant away. We must be alone with him when he becomes


"I think that will do now, Simmons. We have done all that we can at

Let me know instantly if there be anything unusual anywhere."

The man withdrew, and we went into a strict examination of the patient.

fracture of the skull, extending right up through the motor area. The
Professor thought a moment and said:--


as can be; the rapidity of the suffusion shows the terrible nature of
his injury. The whole motor area seems affected. The suffusion of the

too late." As he was speaking there was a soft tapping at the door. I
went over and opened it and found in the corridor without, Arthur and


"I heard your man call up Dr. Van Helsing and tell him of an accident.
So I woke Quincey or rather called for him as he was not asleep. Things

these times. I've been thinking that to-morrow night will not see things
as they have been. We'll have to look back--and forward a little more
than we have done. May we come in?" I nodded, and held the door open

attitude and state of the patient, and noted the horrible pool on the


"My God! what has happened to him? Poor, poor devil!" I told him
briefly, and added that we expected he would recover consciousness after

down on the edge of the bed, with Godalming beside him; we all watched


"We shall wait," said Van Helsing, "just long enough to fix the best
spot for trephining, so that we may most quickly and perfectly remove


The minutes during which we waited passed with fearful slowness. I had a
horrible sinking in my heart, and from Van Helsing's face I gathered

the words that Renfield might speak. I was positively afraid to think;
but the conviction of what was coming was on me, as I have read of men

uncertain gasps. Each instant he seemed as though he would open his eyes
and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he
would relapse into a more fixed insensibility. Inured as I was to sick

hear the beating of my own heart; and the blood surging through my
temples sounded like blows from a hammer. The silence finally became

their flushed faces and damp brows that they were enduring equal
torture. There was a nervous suspense over us all, as though overhead



At last there came a time when it was evident that the patient was
sinking fast; he might die at any moment. I looked up at the Professor
and caught his eyes fixed on mine. His face was sternly set as he



been thinking so, as I stood here. It may be there is a soul at stake!


Without another word he made the operation. For a few moments the
breathing continued to be stertorous. Then there came a breath so

Suddenly his eyes opened, and became fixed in a wild, helpless stare.
This was continued for a few moments; then it softened into a glad

convulsively, and as he did so, said:--


have had a terrible dream, and it has left me so weak that I cannot
move. What's wrong with my face? it feels all swollen, and it smarts
dreadfully." He tried to turn his head; but even with the effort his

Helsing said in a quiet grave tone:--


brightened, through its mutilation, and he said:--

"That is Dr. Van Helsing. How good it is of you to be here. Give me some

stopped and seemed fainting, I called quietly to Quincey--"The
brandy--it is in my study--quick!" He flew and returned with a glass,

lips, and the patient quickly revived. It seemed, however, that his poor
injured brain had been working in the interval, for, when he was quite

shall never forget, and said:--


Then his eyes roved round the room; as they caught sight of the two
figures sitting patiently on the edge of the bed he went on:--


eyes closed--not with pain or sleep but voluntarily, as though he were
bringing all his faculties to bear; when he opened them he said,


"Quick, Doctor, quick. I am dying! I feel that I have but a few minutes;
and then I must go back to death--or worse! Wet my lips with brandy
again. I have something that I must say before I die; or before my poor

me, when I implored you to let me go away. I couldn't speak then, for I
felt my tongue was tied; but I was as sane then, except in that way, as

me; it seemed hours. Then there came a sudden peace to me. My brain
seemed to become cool again, and I realised where I was. I heard the

Helsing's eyes never blinked, but his hand came out and met mine and
gripped it hard. He did not, however, betray himself; he nodded slightly


"He came up to the window in the mist, as I had seen him often before;
but he was solid then--not a ghost, and his eyes were fierce like a
man's when angry. He was laughing with his red mouth; the sharp white

of trees, to where the dogs were barking. I wouldn't ask him to come in
at first, though I knew he wanted to--just as he had wanted all along.

was interrupted by a word from the Professor:--



"By making them happen; just as he used to send in the flies when the

wings; and big moths, in the night, with skull and cross-bones on their
backs." Van Helsing nodded to him as he whispered to me unconsciously:--

"The _Acherontia Aitetropos of the Sphinges_--what you call the


"Then he began to whisper: 'Rats, rats, rats! Hundreds, thousands,
millions of them, and every one a life; and dogs to eat them, and cats

buzzing flies!' I laughed at him, for I wanted to see what he could do.
Then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in His house. He

hands, and seemed to call out without using any words. A dark mass
spread over the grass, coming on like the shape of a flame of fire; and

were thousands of rats with their eyes blazing red--like His, only
smaller. He held up his hand, and they all stopped; and I thought he
seemed to be saying: 'All these lives will I give you, ay, and many more

me!' And then a red cloud, like the colour of blood, seemed to close
over my eyes; and before I knew what I was doing, I found myself opening

all gone, but He slid into the room through the sash, though it was only
open an inch wide--just as the Moon herself has often come in through

splendour."


he continued; but it seemed as though his memory had gone on working in
the interval for his story was further advanced. I was about to call him

not interrupt him; he cannot go back, and maybe could not proceed at all
if once he lost the thread of his thought." He proceeded:--


even a blow-fly, and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him.
When he slid in through the window, though it was shut, and did not even
knock, I got mad with him. He sneered at me, and his white face looked

owned the whole place, and I was no one. He didn't even smell the same
as he went by me. I couldn't hold him. I thought that, somehow, Mrs.


The two men sitting on the bed stood up and came over, standing behind

They were both silent, but the Professor started and quivered; his face,
however, grew grimmer and sterner still. Renfield went on without


"When Mrs. Harker came in to see me this afternoon she wasn't the same;

but no one said a word; he went on:--

"I didn't know that she was here till she spoke; and she didn't look the

in them, and hers had all seemed to have run out. I didn't think of it
at the time; but when she went away I began to think, and it made me mad

the rest quivered, as I did, but we remained otherwise still. "So when
He came to-night I was ready for Him. I saw the mist stealing in, and I
grabbed it tight. I had heard that madmen have unnatural strength; and

Ay, and He felt it too, for He had to come out of the mist to struggle
with me. I held tight; and I thought I was going to win, for I didn't

into me, and my strength became like water. He slipped through it, and
when I tried to cling to Him, He raised me up and flung me down. There
was a red cloud before me, and a noise like thunder, and the mist seemed

breath more stertorous. Van Helsing stood up instinctively.

"We know the worst now," he said. "He is here, and we know his purpose.

night, but lose no time; there is not an instant to spare." There was no
need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in

had when we entered the Count's house. The Professor had his ready, and
as we met in the corridor he pointed to them significantly as he said:--

"They never leave me; and they shall not till this unhappy business is

Alas! alas! that that dear Madam Mina should suffer!" He stopped; his
voice was breaking, and I do not know if rage or terror predominated in


Outside the Harkers' door we paused. Art and Quincey held back, and the




"We must," said Van Helsing grimly. "If the door be locked, I shall


"May it not frighten her terribly? It is unusual to break into a lady's



death. All chambers are alike to the doctor; and even were they not they
are all as one to me to-night. Friend John, when I turn the handle, if
the door does not open, do you put your shoulder down and shove; and you


He turned the handle as he spoke, but the door did not yield. We threw

headlong into the room. The Professor did actually fall, and I saw
across him as he gathered himself up from hands and knees. What I saw

and my heart seemed to stand still.


was light enough to see. On the bed beside the window lay Jonathan
Harker, his face flushed and breathing heavily as though in a stupor.

figure of his wife. By her side stood a tall, thin man, clad in black.
His face was turned from us, but the instant we saw we all recognised
the Count--in every way, even to the scar on his forehead. With his left

at full tension; his right hand gripped her by the back of the neck,
forcing her face down on his bosom. Her white nightdress was smeared

was shown by his torn-open dress. The attitude of the two had a terrible
resemblance to a child forcing a kitten's nose into a saucer of milk to
compel it to drink. As we burst into the room, the Count turned his

into it. His eyes flamed red with devilish passion; the great nostrils
of the white aquiline nose opened wide and quivered at the edge; and the

champed together like those of a wild beast. With a wrench, which threw
his victim back upon the bed as though hurled from a height, he turned
and sprang at us. But by this time the Professor had gained his feet,

Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside
the tomb, and cowered back. Further and further back he cowered, as we,

great black cloud sailed across the sky; and when the gaslight sprang up
under Quincey's match, we saw nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we

open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Art, and I moved
forward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time had drawn her breath and with
it had given a scream so wild, so ear-piercing, so despairing that it

few seconds she lay in her helpless attitude and disarray. Her face was
ghastly, with a pallor which was accentuated by the blood which smeared

blood; her eyes were mad with terror. Then she put before her face her
poor crushed hands, which bore on their whiteness the red mark of the
Count's terrible grip, and from behind them came a low desolate wail

endless grief. Van Helsing stepped forward and drew the coverlet gently
over her body, whilst Art, after looking at her face for an instant


"Jonathan is in a stupor such as we know the Vampire can produce. We can
do nothing with poor Madam Mina for a few moments till she recovers

and with it began to flick him on the face, his wife all the while
holding her face between her hands and sobbing in a way that was

window. There was much moonshine; and as I looked I could see Quincey
Morris run across the lawn and hide himself in the shadow of a great

instant I heard Harker's quick exclamation as he woke to partial
consciousness, and turned to the bed. On his face, as there might well
be, was a look of wild amazement. He seemed dazed for a few seconds, and

started up. His wife was aroused by the quick movement, and turned to
him with her arms stretched out, as though to embrace him; instantly,

her hands before her face, and shuddered till the bed beneath her shook.

"In God's name what does this mean?" Harker cried out. "Dr. Seward, Dr.
Van Helsing, what is it? What has happened? What is wrong? Mina, dear,

this!" and, raising himself to his knees, he beat his hands wildly
together. "Good God help us! help her! oh, help her!" With a quick

man in him awake at the need for instant exertion. "What has happened?
Tell me all about it!" he cried without pausing. "Dr. Van Helsing, you

far yet. Guard her while I look for _him_!" His wife, through her terror
and horror and distress, saw some sure danger to him: instantly


"No! no! Jonathan, you must not leave me. I have suffered enough
to-night, God knows, without the dread of his harming you. You must stay

expression became frantic as she spoke; and, he yielding to her, she
pulled him down sitting on the bed side, and clung to him fiercely.

Van Helsing and I tried to calm them both. The Professor held up his


"Do not fear, my dear. We are here; and whilst this is close to you no
foul thing can approach. You are safe for to-night; and we must be calm

her head on her husband's breast. When she raised it, his white
night-robe was stained with blood where her lips had touched, and where

saw it she drew back, with a low wail, and whispered, amidst choking


"Unclean, unclean! I must touch him or kiss him no more. Oh, that it
should be that it is I who am now his worst enemy, and whom he may have


"Nonsense, Mina. It is a shame to me to hear such a word. I would not
hear it of you; and I shall not hear it from you. May God judge me by my

if by any act or will of mine anything ever come between us!" He put out
his arms and folded her to his breast; and for a while she lay there

damply above his quivering nostrils; his mouth was set as steel. After a
while her sobs became less frequent and more faint, and then he said to

power to the utmost:--


fact; tell me all that has been." I told him exactly what had happened,
and he listened with seeming impassiveness; but his nostrils twitched
and his eyes blazed as I told how the ruthless hands of the Count had

the open wound in his breast. It interested me, even at that moment, to
see, that, whilst the face of white set passion worked convulsively over

hair. Just as I had finished, Quincey and Godalming knocked at the door.
They entered in obedience to our summons. Van Helsing looked at me
questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were to take advantage of

and wife from each other and from themselves; so on nodding acquiescence
to him he asked them what they had seen or done. To which Lord Godalming


"I could not see him anywhere in the passage, or in any of our rooms. I

however----" He stopped suddenly, looking at the poor drooping figure on


"Go on, friend Arthur. We want here no more concealments. Our hope now
is in knowing all. Tell freely!" So Art went on:--


seconds, he made rare hay of the place. All the manuscript had been
burned, and the blue flames were flickering amongst the white ashes; the

had helped the flames." Here I interrupted. "Thank God there is the
other copy in the safe!" His face lit for a moment, but fell again as he

into Renfield's room; but there was no trace there except----!" Again he
paused. "Go on," said Harker hoarsely; so he bowed his head and
moistening his lips with his tongue, added: "except that the poor fellow

us she said solemnly:--


something; but, as I took it that it was with a purpose, I said nothing.


"And you, friend Quincey, have you any to tell?"

"A little," he answered. "It may be much eventually, but at present I

go when he left the house. I did not see him; but I saw a bat rise from
Renfield's window, and flap westward. I expected to see him in some

will not be back to-night; for the sky is reddening in the east, and the
dawn is close. We must work to-morrow!"


a couple of minutes there was silence, and I could fancy that I could
hear the sound of our hearts beating; then Van Helsing said, placing his


"And now, Madam Mina--poor, dear, dear Madam Mina--tell us exactly what
happened. God knows that I do not want that you be pained; but it is

quick and sharp, and in deadly earnest. The day is close to us that must
end all, if it may be so; and now is the chance that we may live and



as she clasped her husband closer to her and bent her head lower and
lower still on his breast. Then she raised her head proudly, and held
out one hand to Van Helsing who took it in his, and, after stooping and

of her husband, who held his other arm thrown round her protectingly.
After a pause in which she was evidently ordering her thoughts, she


"I took the sleeping draught which you had so kindly given me, but for a

of horrible fancies began to crowd in upon my mind--all of them
connected with death, and vampires; with blood, and pain, and trouble."

lovingly: "Do not fret, dear. You must be brave and strong, and help me
through the horrible task. If you only knew what an effort it is to me

need your help. Well, I saw I must try to help the medicine to its work
with my will, if it was to do me any good, so I resolutely set myself to

more. Jonathan coming in had not waked me, for he lay by my side when
next I remember. There was in the room the same thin white mist that I
had before noticed. But I forget now if you know of this; you will find

terror which had come to me before and the same sense of some presence.
I turned to wake Jonathan, but found that he slept so soundly that it

tried, but I could not wake him. This caused me a great fear, and I
looked around terrified. Then indeed, my heart sank within me: beside
the bed, as if he had stepped out of the mist--or rather as if the mist

tall, thin man, all in black. I knew him at once from the description of
the others. The waxen face; the high aquiline nose, on which the light

teeth showing between; and the red eyes that I had seemed to see in the
sunset on the windows of St. Mary's Church at Whitby. I knew, too, the

my heart stood still, and I would have screamed out, only that I was
paralysed. In the pause he spoke in a sort of keen, cutting whisper,


"'Silence! If you make a sound I shall take him and dash his brains out
before your very eyes.' I was appalled and was too bewildered to do or

and, holding me tight, bared my throat with the other, saying as he did
so, 'First, a little refreshment to reward my exertions. You may as well
be quiet; it is not the first time, or the second, that your veins have

want to hinder him. I suppose it is a part of the horrible curse that
such is, when his touch is on his victim. And oh, my God, my God, pity

again. She clasped his hand harder, and looked at him pityingly, as if


"I felt my strength fading away, and I was in a half swoon. How long
this horrible thing lasted I know not; but it seemed that a long time
must have passed before he took his foul, awful, sneering mouth away. I

overpower her, and she drooped and would have sunk down but for her
husband's sustaining arm. With a great effort she recovered herself and


"Then he spoke to me mockingly, 'And so you, like the others, would play

frustrate me in my designs! You know now, and they know in part already,
and will know in full before long, what it is to cross my path. They

played wits against me--against me who commanded nations, and intrigued
for them, and fought for them, hundreds of years before they were

to me, flesh of my flesh; blood of my blood; kin of my kin; my bountiful
wine-press for a while; and shall be later on my companion and my
helper. You shall be avenged in turn; for not one of them but shall

have done. You have aided in thwarting me; now you shall come to my
call. When my brain says "Come!" to you, you shall cross land or sea to

shirt, and with his long sharp nails opened a vein in his breast. When
the blood began to spurt out, he took my hands in one of his, holding

the wound, so that I must either suffocate or swallow some of the---- Oh
my God! my God! what have I done? What have I done to deserve such a
fate, I who have tried to walk in meekness and righteousness all my

and in mercy pity those to whom she is dear!" Then she began to rub her


As she was telling her terrible story, the eastern sky began to quicken,
and everything became more and more clear. Harker was still and quiet;
but over his face, as the awful narrative went on, came a grey look

red streak of the coming dawn shot up, the flesh stood darkly out


We have arranged that one of us is to stay within call of the unhappy
pair till we can meet together and arrange about taking action.


all the great round of its daily course.









_3 October._--As I must do something or go mad, I write this diary. It
is now six o'clock, and we are to meet in the study in half an hour and

that if we do not eat we cannot work our best. Our best will be, God
knows, required to-day. I must keep writing at every chance, for I dare

the little things may teach us most. The teaching, big or little, could
not have landed Mina or me anywhere worse than we are to-day. However,

running down her dear cheeks, that it is in trouble and trial that our
faith is tested--that we must keep on trusting; and that God will aid us
up to the end. The end! oh my God! what end?... To work! To work!


Renfield, we went gravely into what was to be done. First, Dr. Seward
told us that when he and Dr. Van Helsing had gone down to the room below

all bruised and crushed in, and the bones of the neck were broken.

Dr. Seward asked the attendant who was on duty in the passage if he had
heard anything. He said that he had been sitting down--he confessed to

had called out loudly several times, "God! God! God!" after that there
was a sound of falling, and when he entered the room he found him lying

asked if he had heard "voices" or "a voice," and he said he could not
say; that at first it had seemed to him as if there were two, but as

to it, if required, that the word "God" was spoken by the patient. Dr.
Seward said to us, when we were alone, that he did not wish to go into
the matter; the question of an inquest had to be considered, and it

it was, he thought that on the attendant's evidence he could give a
certificate of death by misadventure in falling from bed. In case the

to the same result.


step, the very first thing we decided was that Mina should be in full
confidence; that nothing of any sort--no matter how painful--should be

to see her so brave and yet so sorrowful, and in such a depth of
despair. "There must be no concealment," she said, "Alas! we have had
too much already. And besides there is nothing in all the world that can

Whatever may happen, it must be of new hope or of new courage to me!"
Van Helsing was looking at her fixedly as she spoke, and said, suddenly



others from yourself, after what has happened?" Her face grew set in its
lines, but her eyes shone with the devotion of a martyr as she




"To what?" he asked gently, whilst we were all very still; for each in
our own way we had a sort of vague idea of what she meant. Her answer


"Because if I find in myself--and I shall watch keenly for it--a sign of
harm to any that I love, I shall die!"



"I would; if there were no friend who loved me, who would save me such a

spoke. He was sitting down; but now he rose and came close to her and
put his hand on her head as he said solemnly:


could hold it in my account with God to find such an euthanasia for you,
even at this moment if it were best. Nay, were it safe! But my

throat; he gulped it down and went on:--

"There are here some who would stand between you and death. You must not

the other, who has fouled your sweet life, is true dead you must not
die; for if he is still with the quick Un-Dead, your death would make

live, though death would seem a boon unspeakable. You must fight Death
himself, though he come to you in pain or in joy; by the day, or the

do not die--nay, nor think of death--till this great evil be past." The
poor dear grew white as death, and shock and shivered, as I have seen a
quicksand shake and shiver at the incoming of the tide. We were all

him said, sweetly, but oh! so sorrowfully, as she held out her hand:--

"I promise you, my dear friend, that if God will let me live, I shall

have passed away from me." She was so good and brave that we all felt
that our hearts were strengthened to work and endure for her, and we
began to discuss what we were to do. I told her that she was to have all

might hereafter use; and was to keep the record as she had done before.
She was pleased with the prospect of anything to do--if "pleased" could


As usual Van Helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was


"It is perhaps well," he said, "that at our meeting after our visit to
Carfax we decided not to do anything with the earth-boxes that lay

would doubtless have taken measures in advance to frustrate such an
effort with regard to the others; but now he does not know our

power exists to us as can sterilise his lairs, so that he cannot use
them as of old. We are now so much further advanced in our knowledge as

Piccadilly, we may track the very last of them. To-day, then, is ours;
and in it rests our hope. The sun that rose on our sorrow this morning
guards us in its course. Until it sets to-night, that monster must

of his earthly envelope. He cannot melt into thin air nor disappear
through cracks or chinks or crannies. If he go through a doorway, he

all his lairs and sterilise them. So we shall, if we have not yet catch
him and destroy him, drive him to bay in some place where the catching

could not contain myself at the thought that the minutes and seconds so
preciously laden with Mina's life and happiness were flying from us,
since whilst we talked action was impossible. But Van Helsing held up

quickest way home is the longest way, so your proverb say. We shall all
act and act with desperate quick, when the time has come. But think, in

The Count may have many houses which he has bought. Of them he will have
deeds of purchase, keys and other things. He will have paper that he
write on; he will have his book of cheques. There are many belongings

where he come and go by the front or the back at all hour, when in the
very vast of the traffic there is none to notice. We shall go there and

friend Arthur call, in his phrases of hunt 'stop the earths' and so we


"Then let us come at once," I cried, "we are wasting the precious,
precious time!" The Professor did not move, but simply said:--



"Any way!" I cried. "We shall break in if need be."

"And your police; where will they be, and what will they say?"


reason for it. So I said, as quietly as I could:--




"Ah, my child, that I do; and indeed there is no wish of me to add to
your anguish. But just think, what can we do, until all the world be at
movement. Then will come our time. I have thought and thought, and it

into the house, but we have no key; is it not so?" I nodded.

"Now suppose that you were, in truth, the owner of that house, and could

housebreaker, what would you do?"


lock for me."



"Oh, no! not if they knew the man was properly employed."


the conscience of the employer, and the belief of your policemen as to
whether or no that employer has a good conscience or a bad one. Your
police must indeed be zealous men and clever--oh, so clever!--in reading

friend Jonathan, you go take the lock off a hundred empty house in this
your London, or of any city in the world; and if you do it as such

no one will interfere. I have read of a gentleman who owned a so fine
house in London, and when he went for months of summer to Switzerland

got in. Then he went and made open the shutters in front and walk out
and in through the door, before the very eyes of the police. Then he
have an auction in that house, and advertise it, and put up big notice;

that other man who own them. Then he go to a builder, and he sell him
that house, making an agreement that he pull it down and take all away

they can. And when that owner come back from his holiday in Switzerland
he find only an empty hole where his house had been. This was all done
_en règle_; and in our work we shall be _en règle_ too. We shall not go

it strange; but we shall go after ten o'clock, when there are many
about, and such things would be done were we indeed owners of the



face became relaxed a thought; there was hope in such good counsel. Van


"When once within that house we may find more clues; at any rate some of
us can remain there whilst the rest find the other places where there be


Lord Godalming stood up. "I can be of some use here," he said. "I shall
wire to my people to have horses and carriages where they will be most


"Look here, old fellow," said Morris, "it is a capital idea to have all

of your snappy carriages with its heraldic adornments in a byway of
Walworth or Mile End would attract too much attention for our purposes?

even leave them somewhere near the neighbourhood we are going to."

"Friend Quincey is right!" said the Professor. "His head is what you
call in plane with the horizon. It is a difficult thing that we go to


Mina took a growing interest in everything and I was rejoiced to see
that the exigency of affairs was helping her to forget for a time the

ghastly, and so thin that her lips were drawn away, showing her teeth in
somewhat of prominence. I did not mention this last, lest it should give

what had occurred with poor Lucy when the Count had sucked her blood. As
yet there was no sign of the teeth growing sharper; but the time as yet


When we came to the discussion of the sequence of our efforts and of the
disposition of our forces, there were new sources of doubt. It was

Count's lair close at hand. In case he should find it out too soon, we
should thus be still ahead of him in our work of destruction; and his
presence in his purely material shape, and at his weakest, might give us



after our visit to Carfax, we should all enter the house in Piccadilly;
that the two doctors and I should remain there, whilst Lord Godalming
and Quincey found the lairs at Walworth and Mile End and destroyed them.

might appear in Piccadilly during the day, and that if so we might be
able to cope with him then and there. At any rate, we might be able to

my going was concerned, for I said that I intended to stay and protect
Mina, I thought that my mind was made up on the subject; but Mina would

in which I could be useful; that amongst the Count's papers might be
some clue which I could understand out of my experience in Transylvania;
and that, as it was, all the strength we could muster was required to

resolution was fixed; she said that it was the last hope for _her_ that
we should all work together. "As for me," she said, "I have no fear.

have in it some element of hope or comfort. Go, my husband! God can, if
He wishes it, guard me as well alone as with any one present." So I
started up crying out: "Then in God's name let us come at once, for we



"Not so!" said Van Helsing, holding up his hand.



"Do you forget," he said, with actually a smile, "that last night he


Did I forget! shall I ever--can I ever! Can any of us ever forget that
terrible scene! Mina struggled hard to keep her brave countenance; but

shuddered whilst she moaned. Van Helsing had not intended to recall her
frightful experience. He had simply lost sight of her and her part in

he was horrified at his thoughtlessness and tried to comfort her. "Oh,
Madam Mina," he said, "dear, dear Madam Mina, alas! that I of all who so
reverence you should have said anything so forgetful. These stupid old

forget it, will you not?" He bent low beside her as he spoke; she took
his hand, and looking at him through her tears, said hoarsely:--


have so much in memory of you that is sweet, that I take it all
together. Now, you must all be going soon. Breakfast is ready, and we


Breakfast was a strange meal to us all. We tried to be cheerful and

us. When it was over, Van Helsing stood up and said:--

"Now, my dear friends, we go forth to our terrible enterprise. Are we

lair; armed against ghostly as well as carnal attack?" We all assured
him. "Then it is well. Now, Madam Mina, you are in any case _quite_ safe

return! But before we go let me see you armed against personal attack. I
have myself, since you came down, prepared your chamber by the placing
of things of which we know, so that He may not enter. Now let me guard

name of the Father, the Son, and----"


had placed the Wafer on Mina's forehead, it had seared it--had burned
into the flesh as though it had been a piece of white-hot metal. My poor
darling's brain had told her the significance of the fact as quickly as

her overwrought nature had its voice in that dreadful scream. But the
words to her thought came quickly; the echo of the scream had not ceased

knees on the floor in an agony of abasement. Pulling her beautiful hair
over her face, as the leper of old his mantle, she wailed out:--

"Unclean! Unclean! Even the Almighty shuns my polluted flesh! I must

all paused. I had thrown myself beside her in an agony of helpless
grief, and putting my arms around held her tight. For a few minutes our

their eyes that ran tears silently. Then Van Helsing turned and said
gravely; so gravely that I could not help feeling that he was in some


"It may be that you may have to bear that mark till God himself see fit,
as He most surely shall, on the Judgment Day, to redress all wrongs of

Mina, my dear, my dear, may we who love you be there to see, when that
red scar, the sign of God's knowledge of what has been, shall pass away,
and leave your forehead as pure as the heart we know. For so surely as

burden that is hard upon us. Till then we bear our Cross, as His Son did
in obedience to His Will. It may be that we are chosen instruments of

through stripes and shame; through tears and blood; through doubts and
fears, and all that makes the difference between God and man."


Mina and I both felt so, and simultaneously we each took one of the old
man's hands and bent over and kissed it. Then without a word we all
knelt down together, and, all holding hands, swore to be true to each

head of her whom, each in his own way, we loved; and we prayed for help
and guidance in the terrible task which lay before us.


neither of us shall forget to our dying day; and we set out.

To one thing I have made up my mind: if we find out that Mina must be a

land alone. I suppose it is thus that in old times one vampire meant
many; just as their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred earth, so


We entered Carfax without trouble and found all things the same as on
the first occasion. It was hard to believe that amongst so prosaic
surroundings of neglect and dust and decay there was any ground for such

not been terrible memories to spur us on, we could hardly have proceeded
with our task. We found no papers, or any sign of use in the house; and

Dr. Van Helsing said to us solemnly as we stood before them:--

"And now, my friends, we have a duty here to do. We must sterilise this

distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has
been holy. Thus we defeat him with his own weapon, for we make it more
holy still. It was sanctified to such use of man, now we sanctify it to

very soon the top of one of the cases was thrown open. The earth smelled
musty and close; but we did not somehow seem to mind, for our attention

Sacred Wafer he laid it reverently on the earth, and then shutting down
the lid began to screw it home, we aiding him as he worked.


them as we had found them to all appearance; but in each was a portion


When we closed the door behind us, the Professor said solemnly:--

"So much is already done. If it may be that with all the others we can

Mina's forehead all white as ivory and with no stain!"

As we passed across the lawn on our way to the station to catch our

window of my own room saw Mina. I waved my hand to her, and nodded to
tell that our work there was successfully accomplished. She nodded in

hand in farewell. It was with a heavy heart that we sought the station
and just caught the train, which was steaming in as we reached the




       *       *       *       *       *


Lord Godalming said to me:--


case there should be any difficulty; for under the circumstances it
wouldn't seem so bad for us to break into an empty house. But you are a
solicitor and the Incorporated Law Society might tell you that you

even of odium, but he went on: "Besides, it will attract less attention
if there are not too many of us. My title will make it all right with

better go with Jack and the Professor and stay in the Green Park,
somewhere in sight of the house; and when you see the door opened and

lookout for you, and shall let you in."


and Morris hurried off in a cab, we following in another. At the corner
of Arlington Street our contingent got out and strolled into the Green
Park. My heart beat as I saw the house on which so much of our hope was

its more lively and spruce-looking neighbours. We sat down on a bench
within good view, and began to smoke cigars so as to attract as little

waited for the coming of the others.


fashion, got Lord Godalming and Morris; and down from the box descended
a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. Morris paid
the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. Together the two

The workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the spikes
of the rail, saying something to a policeman who just then sauntered

placed his bag beside him. After searching through it, he took out a
selection of tools which he produced to lay beside him in orderly

turning to his employers, made some remark. Lord Godalming smiled, and
the man lifted a good-sized bunch of keys; selecting one of them, he
began to probe the lock, as if feeling his way with it. After fumbling

door opened under a slight push from him, and he and the two others
entered the hall. We sat still; my own cigar burnt furiously, but Van

workman come out and bring in his bag. Then he held the door partly
open, steadying it with his knees, whilst he fitted a key to the lock.

gave him something. The man touched his hat, took his bag, put on his
coat and departed; not a soul took the slightest notice of the whole


When the man had fairly gone, we three crossed the street and knocked at

Lord Godalming lighting a cigar.


indeed smell vilely--like the old chapel at Carfax--and with our
previous experience it was plain to us that the Count had been using the
place pretty freely. We moved to explore the house, all keeping together

with, and as yet we did not know whether the Count might not be in the
house. In the dining-room, which lay at the back of the hall, we found

Our work was not over, and would never be until we should have found the
missing box. First we opened the shutters of the window which looked out

pointed to look like the front of a miniature house. There were no
windows in it, so we were not afraid of being over-looked. We did not
lose any time in examining the chests. With the tools which we had

treated those others in the old chapel. It was evident to us that the
Count was not at present in the house, and we proceeded to search for


After a cursory glance at the rest of the rooms, from basement to attic,

which might belong to the Count; and so we proceeded to minutely examine
them. They lay in a sort of orderly disorder on the great dining-room

deeds of the purchase of the houses at Mile End and Bermondsey;
note-paper, envelopes, and pens and ink. All were covered up in thin

brush, a brush and comb, and a jug and basin--the latter containing
dirty water which was reddened as if with blood. Last of all was a
little heap of keys of all sorts and sizes, probably those belonging to

and Quincey Morris taking accurate notes of the various addresses of the
houses in the East and the South, took with them the keys in a great

are, with what patience we can, waiting their return--or the coming of







DR. SEWARD'S DIARY



the coming of Godalming and Quincey Morris. The Professor tried to keep
our minds active by using them all the time. I could see his beneficent

The poor fellow is overwhelmed in a misery that is appalling to see.
Last night he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong, youthful
face, full of energy, and with dark brown hair. To-day he is a drawn,

eyes and grief-written lines of his face. His energy is still intact; in
fact, he is like a living flame. This may yet be his salvation, for, if

in a kind of way, wake again to the realities of life. Poor fellow, I
thought my own trouble was bad enough, but his----! The Professor knows
this well enough, and is doing his best to keep his mind active. What he

well as I can remember, here it is:--


the papers relating to this monster; and the more I have studied, the
greater seems the necessity to utterly stamp him out. All through there
are signs of his advance; not only of his power, but of his knowledge of

he was in life a most wonderful man. Soldier, statesman, and

science-knowledge of his time. He had a mighty brain, a learning beyond
compare, and a heart that knew no fear and no remorse. He dared even to
attend the Scholomance, and there was no branch of knowledge of his time

physical death; though it would seem that memory was not all complete.
In some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is

man's stature. He is experimenting, and doing it well; and if it had not
been that we have crossed his path he would be yet--he may be yet if we
fail--the father or furtherer of a new order of beings, whose road must


Harker groaned and said, "And this is all arrayed against my darling!


"He has all along, since his coming, been trying his power, slowly but
surely; that big child-brain of his is working. Well for us, it is, as

things he would long ago have been beyond our power. However, he means
to succeed, and a man who has centuries before him can afford to wait


"I fail to understand," said Harker wearily. "Oh, do be more plain to
me! Perhaps grief and trouble are dulling my brain."



"Ah, my child, I will be plain. Do you not see how, of late, this
monster has been creeping into knowledge experimentally. How he has been

John's home; for your Vampire, though in all afterwards he can come when
and how he will, must at the first make entry only when asked thereto by
an inmate. But these are not his most important experiments. Do we not

knew not then but that must be so. But all the time that so great
child-brain of his was growing, and he began to consider whether he

found that this be all-right, he try to move them all alone. And so he
progress, and he scatter these graves of him; and none but he know where
they are hidden. He may have intend to bury them deep in the ground. So

form, they do him equal well; and none may know these are his
hiding-place! But, my child, do not despair; this knowledge come to him

and before the sunset this shall be so. Then he have no place where he
can move and hide. I delayed this morning that so we might be sure. Is

more careful than him? By my clock it is one hour and already, if all be
well, friend Arthur and Quincey are on their way to us. To-day is our
day, and we must go sure, if slow, and lose no chance. See! there are


Whilst he was speaking we were startled by a knock at the hall door, the

hall with one impulse, and Van Helsing, holding up his hand to us to
keep silence, stepped to the door and opened it. The boy handed in a
despatch. The Professor closed the door again, and, after looking at the


"Look out for D. He has just now, 12:45, come from Carfax hurriedly and

to see you: Mina."



"Now, God be thanked, we shall soon meet!" Van Helsing turned to him


"God will act in His own way and time. Do not fear, and do not rejoice


"I care for nothing now," he answered hotly, "except to wipe out this
brute from the face of creation. I would sell my soul to do it!"


souls in this wise; and the Devil, though he may purchase, does not keep
faith. But God is merciful and just, and knows your pain and your

doubled, did she but hear your wild words. Do not fear any of us, we are
all devoted to this cause, and to-day shall see the end. The time is
coming for action; to-day this Vampire is limit to the powers of man,

here--see, it is twenty minutes past one--and there are yet some times
before he can hither come, be he never so quick. What we must hope for


About half an hour after we had received Mrs. Harker's telegram, there
came a quiet, resolute knock at the hall door. It was just an ordinary

the Professor's heart and mine beat loudly. We looked at each other, and
together moved out into the hall; we each held ready to use our various
armaments--the spiritual in the left hand, the mortal in the right. Van

back, having both hands ready for action. The gladness of our hearts
must have shown upon our faces when on the step, close to the door, we

the door behind them, the former saying, as they moved along the


"It is all right. We found both places; six boxes in each and we




"For him!" We were silent for a minute, and then Quincey said:--

"There's nothing to do but to wait here. If, however, he doesn't turn up

alone after sunset."


consulting his pocket-book. "_Nota bene_, in Madam's telegram he went
south from Carfax, that means he went to cross the river, and he could

o'clock. That he went south has a meaning for us. He is as yet only
suspicious; and he went from Carfax first to the place where he would

short time before him. That he is not here already shows that he went to
Mile End next. This took him some time; for he would then have to be
carried over the river in some way. Believe me, my friends, we shall not

we may throw away no chance. Hush, there is no time now. Have all your
arms! Be ready!" He held up a warning hand as he spoke, for we all could


I could not but admire, even at such a moment, the way in which a
dominant spirit asserted itself. In all our hunting parties and

been the one to arrange the plan of action, and Arthur and I had been
accustomed to obey him implicitly. Now, the old habit seemed to be

laid out our plan of attack, and, without speaking a word, with a
gesture, placed us each in position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were

guard it whilst we two stepped between the incomer and the door.
Godalming behind and Quincey in front stood just out of sight ready to

seconds pass with nightmare slowness. The slow, careful steps came along
the hall; the Count was evidently prepared for some surprise--at least


Suddenly with a single bound he leaped into the room, winning a way past

so panther-like in the movement--something so unhuman, that it seemed
to sober us all from the shock of his coming. The first to act was
Harker, who, with a quick movement, threw himself before the door

horrible sort of snarl passed over his face, showing the eye-teeth long
and pointed; but the evil smile as quickly passed into a cold stare of

impulse, we all advanced upon him. It was a pity that we had not some
better organised plan of attack, for even at the moment I wondered what

avail us anything. Harker evidently meant to try the matter, for he had
ready his great Kukri knife and made a fierce and sudden cut at him. The
blow was a powerful one; only the diabolical quickness of the Count's

through his heart. As it was, the point just cut the cloth of his coat,
making a wide gap whence a bundle of bank-notes and a stream of gold

moment I feared for Harker, though I saw him throw the terrible knife
aloft again for another stroke. Instinctively I moved forward with a
protective impulse, holding the Crucifix and Wafer in my left hand. I

saw the monster cower back before a similar movement made spontaneously
by each one of us. It would be impossible to describe the expression of

the Count's face. His waxen hue became greenish-yellow by the contrast
of his burning eyes, and the red scar on the forehead showed on the
pallid skin like a palpitating wound. The next instant, with a sinuous

a handful of the money from the floor, dashed across the room, threw
himself at the window. Amid the crash and glitter of the falling glass,

shivering glass I could hear the "ting" of the gold, as some of the


We ran over and saw him spring unhurt from the ground. He, rushing up
the steps, crossed the flagged yard, and pushed open the stable door.


"You think to baffle me, you--with your pale faces all in a row, like
sheep in a butcher's. You shall be sorry yet, each one of you! You think

just begun! I spread it over centuries, and time is on my side. Your
girls that you all love are mine already; and through them you and

jackals when I want to feed. Bah!" With a contemptuous sneer, he passed
quickly through the door, and we heard the rusty bolt creak as he

to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following
him through the stable, we moved toward the hall.


fears us; he fear time, he fear want! For if not, why he hurry so? His
very tone betray him, or my ears deceive. Why take that money? You

me, I make sure that nothing here may be of use to him, if so that he
return." As he spoke he put the money remaining into his pocket; took

remaining things into the open fireplace, where he set fire to them with


Godalming and Morris had rushed out into the yard, and Harker had
lowered himself from the window to follow the Count. He had, however,

was no sign of him. Van Helsing and I tried to make inquiry at the back
of the house; but the mews was deserted and no one had seen him depart.

It was now late in the afternoon, and sunset was not far off. We had to



"Let us go back to Madam Mina--poor, poor dear Madam Mina. All we can do
just now is done; and we can there, at least, protect her. But we need
not despair. There is but one more earth-box, and we must try to find

bravely as he could to comfort Harker. The poor fellow was quite broken
down; now and again he gave a low groan which he could not suppress--he


With sad hearts we came back to my house, where we found Mrs. Harker

bravery and unselfishness. When she saw our faces, her own became as
pale as death: for a second or two her eyes were closed as if she were


"I can never thank you all enough. Oh, my poor darling!" As she spoke,
she took her husband's grey head in her hands and kissed it--"Lay your
poor head here and rest it. All will yet be well, dear! God will protect

was no place for words in his sublime misery.


all up somewhat. It was, perhaps, the mere animal heat of food to hungry
people--for none of us had eaten anything since breakfast--or the sense
of companionship may have helped us; but anyhow we were all less

our promise, we told Mrs. Harker everything which had passed; and
although she grew snowy white at times when danger had seemed to

manifested, she listened bravely and with calmness. When we came to the
part where Harker had rushed at the Count so recklessly, she clung to

protect him from any harm that might come. She said nothing, however,
till the narration was all done, and matters had been brought right up

stood up amongst us and spoke. Oh, that I could give any idea of the
scene; of that sweet, sweet, good, good woman in all the radiant beauty
of her youth and animation, with the red scar on her forehead, of which

teeth--remembering whence and how it came; her loving kindness against
our grim hate; her tender faith against all our fears and doubting; and

purity and faith, was outcast from God.


so full of love and tenderness, "Jonathan dear, and you all my true,
true friends, I want you to bear something in mind through all this

you destroyed the false Lucy so that the true Lucy might live hereafter;
but it is not a work of hate. That poor soul who has wrought all this
misery is the saddest case of all. Just think what will be his joy when

spiritual immortality. You must be pitiful to him, too, though it may


As she spoke I could see her husband's face darken and draw together, as
though the passion in him were shrivelling his being to its core.
Instinctively the clasp on his wife's hand grew closer, till his

must have suffered, but looked at him with eyes that were more appealing
than ever. As she stopped speaking he leaped to his feet, almost tearing


"May God give him into my hand just for long enough to destroy that

his soul for ever and ever to burning hell I would do it!"

"Oh, hush! oh, hush! in the name of the good God. Don't say such things,

think, my dear--I have been thinking all this long, long day of it--that
... perhaps ... some day ... I, too, may need such pity; and that some
other like you--and with equal cause for anger--may deny it to me! Oh,

had there been another way; but I pray that God may not have treasured
your wild words, except as the heart-broken wail of a very loving and

of what he has suffered, who all his life has done no wrong, and on whom


We men were all in tears now. There was no resisting them, and we wept
openly. She wept, too, to see that her sweeter counsels had prevailed.
Her husband flung himself on his knees beside her, and putting his arms

to us and we stole out of the room, leaving the two loving hearts alone


Before they retired the Professor fixed up the room against any coming
of the Vampire, and assured Mrs. Harker that she might rest in peace.

husband's sake, tried to seem content. It was a brave struggle; and was,
I think and believe, not without its reward. Van Helsing had placed at

When they had retired, Quincey, Godalming, and I arranged that we should
sit up, dividing the night between us, and watch over the safety of the
poor stricken lady. The first watch falls to Quincey, so the rest of us

for his is the second watch. Now that my work is done I, too, shall go





_3-4 October, close to midnight._--I thought yesterday would never end.
There was over me a yearning for sleep, in some sort of blind belief
that to wake would be to find things changed, and that any change must

was to be, but we could arrive at no result. All we knew was that one
earth-box remained, and that the Count alone knew where it was. If he

meantime!--the thought is too horrible, I dare not think of it even now.
This I know: that if ever there was a woman who was all perfection, that
one is my poor wronged darling. I love her a thousand times more for her

seem despicable. Surely God will not permit the world to be the poorer
by the loss of such a creature. This is hope to me. We are all drifting

sleeping, and sleeping without dreams. I fear what her dreams might be
like, with such terrible memories to ground them in. She has not been so

over her face a repose which was like spring after the blasts of March.
I thought at the time that it was the softness of the red sunset on her
face, but somehow now I think it has a deeper meaning. I am not sleepy

for there is to-morrow to think of, and there is no rest for me





sitting up in bed, with a startled look on her face. I could see easily,
for we did not leave the room in darkness; she had placed a warning hand


"Hush! there is someone in the corridor!" I got up softly, and crossing


Just outside, stretched on a mattress, lay Mr. Morris, wide awake. He
raised a warning hand for silence as he whispered to me:--


night. We don't mean to take any chances!"


She sighed and positively a shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale
face as she put her arms round me and said softly:--


sleep. I write this now as I am not sleepy, though I must try again.



_4 October, morning._--Once again during the night I was wakened by
Mina. This time we had all had a good sleep, for the grey of the coming
dawn was making the windows into sharp oblongs, and the gas flame was


"Go, call the Professor. I want to see him at once."



"I have an idea. I suppose it must have come in the night, and matured

shall be able to speak. Go quick, dearest; the time is getting close." I
went to the door. Dr. Seward was resting on the mattress, and, seeing


"Is anything wrong?" he asked, in alarm.



"I will go," he said, and hurried into the Professor's room.


dressing-gown, and Mr. Morris and Lord Godalming were with Dr. Seward at
the door asking questions. When the Professor saw Mina a smile--a
positive smile ousted the anxiety of his face; he rubbed his hands as he



we have got our dear Madam Mina, as of old, back to us to-day!" Then
turning to her, he said, cheerfully: "And what am I do for you? For at


"I want you to hypnotise me!" she said. "Do it before the dawn, for I
feel that then I can speak, and speak freely. Be quick, for the time is


Looking fixedly at her, he commenced to make passes in front of her,
from over the top of her head downward, with each hand in turn. Mina

like a trip hammer, for I felt that some crisis was at hand. Gradually
her eyes closed, and she sat, stock still; only by the gentle heaving of

more passes and then stopped, and I could see that his forehead was
covered with great beads of perspiration. Mina opened her eyes; but she
did not seem the same woman. There was a far-away look in her eyes, and

impose silence, the Professor motioned to me to bring the others in.
They came on tip-toe, closing the door behind them, and stood at the

stillness was broken by Van Helsing's voice speaking in a low level tone
which would not break the current of her thoughts:--



"I do not know. Sleep has no place it can call its own." For several
minutes there was silence. Mina sat rigid, and the Professor stood

was growing lighter; without taking his eyes from Mina's face, Dr. Van
Helsing motioned me to pull up the blind. I did so, and the day seemed

itself through the room. On the instant the Professor spoke again:--

"Where are you now?" The answer came dreamily, but with intention; it
were as though she were interpreting something. I have heard her use the




"What do you see?"



"What do you hear?" I could detect the strain in the Professor's patient



hear them on the outside."


something each from the other. We were afraid to think. The answer came




"What else do you hear?"


creaking of a chain, and the loud tinkle as the check of the capstan


"What are you doing?"


a deep breath as of one sleeping, and the open eyes closed again.

By this time the sun had risen, and we were all in the full light of

head down softly on her pillow. She lay like a sleeping child for a few
moments, and then, with a long sigh, awoke and stared in wonder to see

She seemed, however, to know the situation without telling, though she
was eager to know what she had told. The Professor repeated the


"Then there is not a moment to lose: it may not be yet too late!" Mr.
Morris and Lord Godalming started for the door but the Professor's calm


"Stay, my friends. That ship, wherever it was, was weighing anchor

your so great Port of London. Which of them is it that you seek? God be
thanked that we have once again a clue, though whither it may lead us we

since when we can look back we see what we might have seen looking
forward if we had been able to see what we might have seen! Alas, but

Count's mind, when he seize that money, though Jonathan's so fierce
knife put him in the danger that even he dread. He meant escape. Hear
me, ESCAPE! He saw that with but one earth-box left, and a pack of men

have take his last earth-box on board a ship, and he leave the land. He
think to escape, but no! we follow him. Tally Ho! as friend Arthur would

we must follow with wile. I, too, am wily and I think his mind in a
little while. In meantime we may rest and in peace, for there are waters
between us which he do not want to pass, and which he could not if he

slack tide. See, and the sun is just rose, and all day to sunset is to
us. Let us take bath, and dress, and have breakfast which we all need,

us." Mina looked at him appealingly as she asked:--

"But why need we seek him further, when he is gone away from us?" He


"Ask me nothings as yet. When we have breakfast, then I answer all


After breakfast Mina repeated her question. He looked at her gravely for


"Because my dear, dear Madam Mina, now more than ever must we find him
even if we have to follow him to the jaws of Hell!" She grew paler as




"Because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you are
but mortal woman. Time is now to be dreaded--since once he put that mark














You are to stay with your dear Madam Mina. We shall go to make our
search--if I can call it so, for it is not search but knowing, and we
seek confirmation only. But do you stay and take care of her to-day.

here. Let me tell you that so you will know what we four know already,
for I have tell them. He, our enemy, have gone away; he have gone back

fire wrote it on the wall. He have prepare for this in some way, and
that last earth-box was ready to ship somewheres. For this he took the

go down. It was his last hope, save that he might hide in the tomb that
he think poor Miss Lucy, being as he thought like him, keep open to him.
But there was not of time. When that fail he make straight for his last

He is clever, oh, so clever! he know that his game here was finish; and
so he decide he go back home. He find ship going by the route he came,

when we have discover that, we come back and tell you all. Then we will
comfort you and poor dear Madam Mina with new hope. For it will be hope
when you think it over: that all is not lost. This very creature that we

one day, when we know of the disposal of him we drive him out. He is
finite, though he is powerful to do much harm and suffers not as we do.

together. Take heart afresh, dear husband of Madam Mina. This battle is
but begun, and in the end we shall win--so sure as that God sits on high
to watch over His children. Therefore be of much comfort till we return.






_4 October._--When I read to Mina, Van Helsing's message in the

certainty that the Count is out of the country has given her comfort;
and comfort is strength to her. For my own part, now that his horrible

believe in it. Even my own terrible experiences in Castle Dracula seem
like a long-forgotten dream. Here in the crisp autumn air in the bright


Alas! how can I disbelieve! In the midst of my thought my eye fell on

there can be no disbelief. And afterwards the very memory of it will
keep faith crystal clear. Mina and I fear to be idle, so we have been

seems greater each time, the pain and the fear seem less. There is
something of a guiding purpose manifest throughout, which is comforting.
Mina says that perhaps we are the instruments of ultimate good. It may

yet of the future. It is better to wait till we see the Professor and


The day is running by more quickly than I ever thought a day could run
for me again. It is now three o'clock.





Helsing, Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, Mr. Quincey Morris, Jonathan


Dr. Van Helsing described what steps were taken during the day to
discover on what boat and whither bound Count Dracula made his escape:--


he must go by the Danube mouth; or by somewhere in the Black Sea, since
by that way he come. It was a dreary blank that was before us. _Omne
ignotum pro magnifico_; and so with heavy hearts we start to find what

Madam Mina tell of sails being set. These not so important as to go in
your list of the shipping in the _Times_, and so we go, by suggestion of

however so small. There we find that only one Black-Sea-bound ship go
out with the tide. She is the _Czarina Catherine_, and she sail from
Doolittle's Wharf for Varna, and thence on to other parts and up the

we go to Doolittle's Wharf, and there we find a man in an office of wood
so small that the man look bigger than the office. From him we inquire

and loud of voice, but he good fellow all the same; and when Quincey
give him something from his pocket which crackle as he roll it up, and
put it in a so small bag which he have hid deep in his clothing, he

many men who are rough and hot; these be better fellows too when they
have been no more thirsty. They say much of blood and bloom, and of

nevertheless they tell us all things which we want to know.

"They make known to us among them, how last afternoon at about five

and teeth so white, and eyes that seem to be burning. That he be all in
black, except that he have a hat of straw which suit not him or the

sails for the Black Sea and for where. Some took him to the office and
then to the ship, where he will not go aboard but halt at shore end of
gang-plank, and ask that the captain come to him. The captain come, when

agree to term. Then the thin man go and some one tell him where horse
and cart can be hired. He go there and soon he come again, himself

take several to put it on truck for the ship. He give much talk to
captain as to how and where his box is to be place; but the captain like
it not and swear at him in many tongues, and tell him that if he like he

yet, for that he have much to do. Whereupon the captain tell him that he
had better be quick--with blood--for that his ship will leave the

man smile and say that of course he must go when he think fit; but he
will be surprise if he go quite so soon. The captain swear again,

will so far intrude on his kindness as to come aboard before the
sailing. Final the captain, more red than ever, and in more tongues tell

with blood--in his ship--with blood on her also. And so, after asking
where there might be close at hand a ship where he might purchase ship


"No one knew where he went 'or bloomin' well cared,' as they said, for
they had something else to think of--well with blood again; for it soon

was expected. A thin mist began to creep up from the river, and it grew,
and grew; till soon a dense fog enveloped the ship and all around her.

blood; but he could do nothing. The water rose and rose; and he began to
fear that he would lose the tide altogether. He was in no friendly mood,

asked to see where his box had been stowed. Then the captain replied
that he wished that he and his box--old and with much bloom and
blood--were in hell. But the thin man did not be offend, and went down

on deck in fog. He must have come off by himself, for none notice him.
Indeed they thought not of him; for soon the fog begin to melt away, and

of bloom and blood laughed, as they told how the captain's swears
exceeded even his usual polyglot, and was more than ever full of

and down on the river that hour, he found that few of them had seen any
of fog at all, except where it lay round the wharf. However, the ship
went out on the ebb tide; and was doubtless by morning far down the


"And so, my dear Madam Mina, it is that we have to rest for a time, for
our enemy is on the sea, with the fog at his command, on his way to the

we start we go on land more quick, and we meet him there. Our best hope
is to come on him when in the box between sunrise and sunset; for then

are days for us, in which we can make ready our plan. We know all about
where he go; for we have seen the owner of the ship, who have shown us
invoices and all papers that can be. The box we seek is to be landed in

his credentials; and so our merchant friend will have done his part.
When he ask if there be any wrong, for that so, he can telegraph and

for police or of the customs. It must be done by us alone and in our own


When Dr. Van Helsing had done speaking, I asked him if he were certain
that the Count had remained on board the ship. He replied: "We have the

morning." I asked him again if it were really necessary that they should
pursue the Count, for oh! I dread Jonathan leaving me, and I know that
he would surely go if the others went. He answered in growing passion,

forceful, till in the end we could not but see wherein was at least some
of that personal dominance which made him so long a master amongst



and then for the sake of humanity. This monster has done much harm
already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the short
time when as yet he was only as a body groping his so small measure in

dear Madam Mina, will learn it in the phonograph of my friend John, or
in that of your husband. I have told them how the measure of leaving his

of man teems till they are like the multitude of standing corn, was the
work of centuries. Were another of the Un-Dead, like him, to try to do
what he has done, perhaps not all the centuries of the world that have

nature that are occult and deep and strong must have worked together in
some wondrous way. The very place, where he have been alive, Un-Dead for

world. There are deep caverns and fissures that reach none know whither.
There have been volcanoes, some of whose openings still send out waters
of strange properties, and gases that kill or make to vivify. Doubtless,

occult forces which work for physical life in strange way; and in
himself were from the first some great qualities. In a hard and warlike

more braver heart, than any man. In him some vital principle have in
strange way found their utmost; and as his body keep strong and grow and
thrive, so his brain grow too. All this without that diabolic aid which

and are, symbolic of good. And now this is what he is to us. He have
infect you--oh, forgive me, my dear, that I must say such; but it is for

no more, you have only to live--to live in your own old, sweet way; and
so in time, death, which is of man's common lot and with God's sanction,
shall make you like to him. This must not be! We have sworn together

world, and men for whom His Son die, will not be given over to monsters,
whose very existence would defame Him. He have allowed us to redeem one

more. Like them we shall travel towards the sunrise; and like them, if
we fall, we fall in good cause." He paused and I said:--


from England, will he not avoid it, as a tiger does the village from


"Aha!" he said, "your simile of the tiger good, for me, and I shall
adopt him. Your man-eater, as they of India call the tiger who has once

unceasing till he get him. This that we hunt from our village is a
tiger, too, a man-eater, and he never cease to prowl. Nay, in himself he
is not one to retire and stay afar. In his life, his living life, he go

beaten back, but did he stay? No! He come again, and again, and again.
Look at his persistence and endurance. With the child-brain that was to

does he do? He find out the place of all the world most of promise for
him. Then he deliberately set himself down to prepare for the task. He
find in patience just how is his strength, and what are his powers. He

ways, the politic, the law, the finance, the science, the habit of a new
land and a new people who have come to be since he was. His glimpse that

him to grow as to his brain; for it all prove to him how right he was at
the first in his surmises. He have done this alone; all alone! from a
ruin tomb in a forgotten land. What more may he not do when the greater

him; who can flourish in the midst of diseases that kill off whole
peoples. Oh, if such an one was to come from God, and not the Devil,

are pledged to set the world free. Our toil must be in silence, and our
efforts all in secret; for in this enlightened age, when men believe not

strength. It would be at once his sheath and his armour, and his weapons
to destroy us, his enemies, who are willing to peril even our own souls
for the safety of one we love--for the good of mankind, and for the


After a general discussion it was determined that for to-night nothing

think out the proper conclusions. To-morrow, at breakfast, we are to
meet again, and, after making our conclusions known to one another, we


       *       *       *       *       *


presence were removed from me. Perhaps ...


mirror of the red mark upon my forehead; and I knew that I was still





_5 October._--We all rose early, and I think that sleep did much for
each and all of us. When we met at early breakfast there was more
general cheerfulness than any of us had ever expected to experience



any obstructing cause, no matter what, be removed in any way--even by
death--and we fly back to first principles of hope and enjoyment. More

the whole of the past days had not been a dream. It was only when I
caught sight of the red blotch on Mrs. Harker's forehead that I was

matter, it is almost impossible to realise that the cause of all our
trouble is still existent. Even Mrs. Harker seems to lose sight of her
trouble for whole spells; it is only now and again, when something

meet here in my study in half an hour and decide on our course of
action. I see only one immediate difficulty, I know it by instinct

that in some mysterious way poor Mrs. Harker's tongue is tied. I _know_
that she forms conclusions of her own, and from all that has been I can

cannot, give them utterance. I have mentioned this to Van Helsing, and
he and I are to talk it over when we are alone. I suppose it is some of
that horrid poison which has got into her veins beginning to work. The

Vampire's baptism of blood." Well, there may be a poison that distils
itself out of good things; in an age when the existence of ptomaines is

instinct be true regarding poor Mrs. Harker's silences, then there is a
terrible difficulty--an unknown danger--in the work before us. The same
power that compels her silence may compel her speech. I dare not think


Van Helsing is coming to my study a little before the others. I shall


       *       *       *       *       *


things. I could see that he had something on his mind which he wanted to
say, but felt some hesitancy about broaching the subject. After beating


"Friend John, there is something that you and I must talk of alone, just
at the first at any rate. Later, we may have to take the others into our


"Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina is changing." A cold shiver ran
through me to find my worst fears thus endorsed. Van Helsing



before things go too far. Our task is now in reality more difficult than
ever, and this new trouble makes every hour of the direst importance. I
can see the characteristics of the vampire coming in her face. It is now

without to prejudge. Her teeth are some sharper, and at times her eyes
are more hard. But these are not all, there is to her the silence now

wrote that which she wished to be known later. Now my fear is this. If
it be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what the Count see and
hear, is it not more true that he who have hypnotise her first, and who

will, compel her mind to disclose to him that which she know?" I nodded


"Then, what we must do is to prevent this; we must keep her ignorant of
our intent, and so she cannot tell what she know not. This is a painful

When to-day we meet, I must tell her that for reason which we will not
to speak she must not more be of our council, but be simply guarded by
us." He wiped his forehead, which had broken out in profuse perspiration

soul already so tortured. I knew that it would be some sort of comfort
to him if I told him that I also had come to the same conclusion; for at

effect was as I expected.


gone away to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. I
really believe his purpose is to be able to pray alone.



_Later._--At the very outset of our meeting a great personal relief was

message by her husband to say that she would not join us at present, as
she thought it better that we should be free to discuss our movements
without her presence to embarrass us. The Professor and I looked at each

part, I thought that if Mrs. Harker realised the danger herself, it was
much pain as well as much danger averted. Under the circumstances we

preserve silence in our suspicions, until we should have been able to
confer alone again. We went at once into our Plan of Campaign. Van


"The _Czarina Catherine_ left the Thames yesterday morning. It will take
her at the quickest speed she has ever made at least three weeks to

Now, if we allow for two days less for the ship's voyage, owing to such
weather influences as we know that the Count can bring to bear; and if
we allow a whole day and night for any delays which may occur to us,

safe, we must leave here on 17th at latest. Then we shall at any rate
be in Varna a day before the ship arrives, and able to make such

against evil things, spiritual as well as physical." Here Quincey Morris


"I understand that the Count comes from a wolf country, and it may be
that he shall get there before us. I propose that we add Winchesters to

trouble of that sort around. Do you remember, Art, when we had the pack
after us at Tobolsk? What wouldn't we have given then for a repeater



level at all times, but most so when there is to hunt, metaphor be more
dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man. In the meantime we
can do nothing here; and as I think that Varna is not familiar to any of

To-night and to-morrow we can get ready, and then, if all be well, we


"We four?" said Harker interrogatively, looking from one to another of


"Of course!" answered the Professor quickly, "you must remain to take
care of your so sweet wife!" Harker was silent for awhile and then said


"Let us talk of that part of it in the morning. I want to consult with

to disclose our plans to her; but he took no notice. I looked at him
significantly and coughed. For answer he put his finger on his lips and





_5 October, afternoon._--For some time after our meeting this morning I
could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a state of

to take any part in the discussion set me thinking; and as I could not
argue the matter with her, I could only guess. I am as far as ever from

last time we talked of the subject we agreed that there was to be no
more concealment of anything amongst us. Mina is sleeping now, calmly

with happiness. Thank God, there are such moments still for her.

       *       *       *       *       *


came as near to being happy myself as I suppose I shall ever be. As the
evening drew on, and the earth took its shadows from the sun sinking

once Mina opened her eyes, and looking at me tenderly, said:--

"Jonathan, I want you to promise me something on your word of honour. A

broken though I should go down on my knees and implore you with bitter
tears. Quick, you must make it to me at once."


no right to make it."


were like pole stars, "it is I who wish it; and it is not for myself.
You can ask Dr. Van Helsing if I am not right; if he disagrees you may

from the promise."


to me all happiness for her was denied by the red scar on her forehead.


"Promise me that you will not tell me anything of the plans formed for

implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!" and she
solemnly pointed to the scar. I saw that she was in earnest, and said


"I promise!" and as I said it I felt that from that instant a door had




_Later, midnight._--Mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening.
So much so that all the rest seemed to take courage, as if infected

of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired
early. Mina is now sleeping like a little child; it is a wonderful thing
that her faculty of sleep remains to her in the midst of her terrible

Perhaps her example may affect me as her gaiety did to-night. I shall


       *       *       *       *       *


same time as yesterday, and asked me to bring Dr. Van Helsing. I thought
that it was another occasion for hypnotism, and without question went
for the Professor. He had evidently expected some such call, for I found

opening of the door of our room. He came at once; as he passed into the
room, he asked Mina if the others might come, too.


them just as well. I must go with you on your journey."


asked:--






"But why, dear Madam Mina? You know that your safety is our solemnest
duty. We go into danger, to which you are, or may be, more liable than
any of us from--from circumstances--things that have been." He paused,




"I know. That is why I must go. I can tell you now, whilst the sun is
coming up; I may not be able again. I know that when the Count wills me
I must go. I know that if he tells me to come in secret, I must come by

she turned on me as she spoke, and if there be indeed a Recording Angel
that look is noted to her everlasting honour. I could only clasp her

tears. She went on:--


can defy that which would break down the human endurance of one who had
to guard alone. Besides, I may be of service, since you can hypnotise me
and so learn that which even I myself do not know." Dr. Van Helsing said



together we shall do that which we go forth to achieve." When he had
spoken, Mina's long spell of silence made me look at her. She had fallen
back on her pillow asleep; she did not even wake when I had pulled up

motioned to me to come with him quietly. We went to his room, and within
a minute Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and Mr. Morris were with us also.


"In the morning we shall leave for Varna. We have now to deal with a
new factor: Madam Mina. Oh, but her soul is true. It is to her an agony

warned in time. There must be no chance lost, and in Varna we must be
ready to act the instant when that ship arrives."





the box, we shall place a branch of the wild rose on it. This we shall
fasten, for when it is there none can emerge; so at least says the

man's faith in the early, and it have its root in faith still. Then,
when we get the opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we


"I shall not wait for any opportunity," said Morris. "When I see the box
I shall open it and destroy the monster, though there were a thousand

grasped his hand instinctively and found it as firm as a piece of steel.
I think he understood my look; I hope he did.


bless him for it. My child, believe me none of us shall lag behind or
pause from any fear. I do but say what we may do--what we must do. But,

which may happen, and their ways and their ends are so various that
until the moment we may not say. We shall all be armed, in all ways; and

let us to-day put all our affairs in order. Let all things which touch
on others dear to us, and who on us depend, be complete; for none of us
can tell what, or when, or how, the end may be. As for me, my own

arrangements for the travel. I shall have all tickets and so forth for


There was nothing further to be said, and we parted. I shall now settle
up all my affairs of earth, and be ready for whatever may come....



_Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she

have been so good to us shall have remainder.


attention to it. I am sure that there is something on her mind which the
time of exact sunset will reveal. These occasions are becoming harrowing
times for us all, for each sunrise and sunset opens up some new

good end. I write all these things in the diary since my darling must
not hear them now; but if it may be that she can see them again, they












_11 October, Evening._--Jonathan Harker has asked me to note this, as he
says he is hardly equal to the task, and he wants an exact record kept.

I think that none of us were surprised when we were asked to see Mrs.

understand that sunrise and sunset are to her times of peculiar freedom;
when her old self can be manifest without any controlling force subduing

begins some half hour or more before actual sunrise or sunset, and lasts
till either the sun is high, or whilst the clouds are still aglow with
the rays streaming above the horizon. At first there is a sort of

freedom quickly follows; when, however, the freedom ceases the
change-back or relapse comes quickly, preceded only by a spell of



signs of an internal struggle. I put it down myself to her making a
violent effort at the earliest instant she could do so. A very few
minutes, however, gave her complete control of herself; then, motioning

she made the rest of us bring chairs up close. Taking her husband's hand


"We are all here together in freedom, for perhaps the last time! I know,
dear; I know that you will always be with me to the end." This was to

the morning we go out upon our task, and God alone knows what may be in
store for any of us. You are going to be so good to me as to take me

woman, whose soul perhaps is lost--no, no, not yet, but is at any rate
at stake--you will do. But you must remember that I am not as you are.
There is a poison in my blood, in my soul, which may destroy me; which

know as well as I do, that my soul is at stake; and though I know there
is one way out for me, you must not and I must not take it!" She looked


"What is that way?" asked Van Helsing in a hoarse voice. "What is that



the greater evil is entirely wrought. I know, and you know, that were I
once dead you could and would set free my immortal spirit, even as you

that stood in the way I would not shrink to die here, now, amidst the
friends who love me. But death is not all. I cannot believe that to die

done, is God's will. Therefore, I, on my part, give up here the
certainty of eternal rest, and go out into the dark where may be the

silent, for we knew instinctively that this was only a prelude. The
faces of the others were set and Harker's grew ashen grey; perhaps he



quaint legal phrase which she used in such a place, and with all
seriousness. "What will each of you give? Your lives I know," she went

can give them back to Him; but what will you give to me?" She looked
again questioningly, but this time avoided her husband's face. Quincey

you plainly what I want, for there must be no doubtful matter in this
connection between us now. You must promise me, one and all--even you,





"When you shall be convinced that I am so changed that it is better that
I die that I may live. When I am thus dead in the flesh, then you will,

or do whatever else may be wanting to give me rest!"

Quincey was the first to rise after the pause. He knelt down before her


"I'm only a rough fellow, who hasn't, perhaps, lived as a man should to
win such a distinction, but I swear to you by all that I hold sacred and

that you have set us. And I promise you, too, that I shall make all
certain, for if I am only doubtful I shall take it that the time has



bending over, she kissed his hand.



"And I!" said Lord Godalming, each of them in turn kneeling to her to
take the oath. I followed, myself. Then her husband turned to her
wan-eyed and with a greenish pallor which subdued the snowy whiteness of




"You too, my dearest," she said, with infinite yearning of pity in her
voice and eyes. "You must not shrink. You are nearest and dearest and

time. Think, dear, that there have been times when brave men have killed
their wives and their womenkind, to keep them from falling into the
hands of the enemy. Their hands did not falter any the more because

towards those whom they love, in such times of sore trial! And oh, my
dear, if it is to be that I must meet death at any hand, let it be at

forgotten your mercy in poor Lucy's case to him who loved"--she stopped
with a flying blush, and changed her phrase--"to him who had best right

it a happy memory of my husband's life that it was his loving hand which
set me free from the awful thrall upon me."


smiled, positively smiled, as with a sigh of relief she leaned back and


"And now one word of warning, a warning which you must never forget:

such case you must lose no time in using your opportunity. At such a
time I myself might be--nay! if the time ever comes, _shall be_--leagued


"One more request;" she became very solemn as she said this, "it is not
vital and necessary like the other, but I want you to do one thing for



"I want you to read the Burial Service." She was interrupted by a deep
groan from her husband; taking his hand in hers, she held it over her
heart, and continued: "You must read it over me some day. Whatever may

thought to all or some of us. You, my dearest, will I hope read it, for
then it will be in your voice in my memory for ever--come what may!"



"Nay," she said, holding up a warning hand. "I am deeper in death at
this moment than if the weight of an earthly grave lay heavy upon me!"



"It would comfort me, my husband!" was all she said; and he began to


"How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its
solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its

truth in anything holy or emotional, would have been melted to the heart
had he seen that little group of loving and devoted friends kneeling
round that stricken and sorrowing lady; or heard the tender passion of

had to pause, he read the simple and beautiful service from the Burial
of the Dead. I--I cannot go on--words--and--v-voice--f-fail m-me!"



She was right in her instinct. Strange as it all was, bizarre as it may

comforted us much; and the silence, which showed Mrs. Harker's coming
relapse from her freedom of soul, did not seem so full of despair to any





_15 October, Varna._--We left Charing Cross on the morning of the 12th,
got to Paris the same night, and took the places secured for us in the
Orient Express. We travelled night and day, arriving here at about five

arrived for him, whilst the rest of us came on to this hotel--"the
Odessus." The journey may have had incidents; I was, however, too eager

port there will be no interest for me in anything in the wide world.
Thank God! Mina is well, and looks to be getting stronger; her colour is
coming back. She sleeps a great deal; throughout the journey she slept

wakeful and alert; and it has become a habit for Van Helsing to
hypnotise her at such times. At first, some effort was needed, and he

habit, and scarcely any action is needed. He seems to have power at
these particular moments to simply will, and her thoughts obey him. He


"Nothing; all is dark." And to the second:--

"I can hear the waves lapping against the ship, and the water rushing

high--I can hear it in the shrouds, and the bow throws back the foam."
It is evident that the _Czarina Catherine_ is still at sea, hastening on

telegrams, one each day since we started, and all to the same effect:
that the _Czarina Catherine_ had not been reported to Lloyd's from

send him every day a telegram saying if the ship had been reported. He
was to have a message even if she were not reported, so that he might be
sure that there was a watch being kept at the other end of the wire.


Vice-Consul, and to arrange, if we can, about getting on board the ship
as soon as she arrives. Van Helsing says that our chance will be to get

form of a bat, cannot cross the running water of his own volition, and
so cannot leave the ship. As he dare not change to man's form without

box. If, then, we can come on board after sunrise, he is at our mercy;
for we can open the box and make sure of him, as we did of poor Lucy,
before he wakes. What mercy he shall get from us will not count for

seamen. Thank God! this is the country where bribery can do anything,
and we are well supplied with money. We have only to make sure that the

warned, and we shall be safe. Judge Moneybag will settle this case, I


       *       *       *       *       *


water, darkness and favouring winds. We are evidently in good time, and
when we hear of the _Czarina Catherine_ we shall be ready. As she must


       *       *       *       *       *


the Count on his return from his tour. Godalming told the shippers that
he fancied that the box sent aboard might contain something stolen from
a friend of his, and got a half consent that he might open it at his own

facility in doing whatever he chose on board the ship, and also a
similar authorisation to his agent at Varna. We have seen the agent, who

satisfied that whatever he can do to aid our wishes will be done. We
have already arranged what to do in case we get the box open. If the
Count is there, Van Helsing and Seward will cut off his head at once and

prevent interference, even if we have to use the arms which we shall
have ready. The Professor says that if we can so treat the Count's body,

evidence against us, in case any suspicion of murder were aroused. But
even if it were not, we should stand or fall by our act, and perhaps

a rope. For myself, I should take the chance only too thankfully if it
were to come. We mean to leave no stone unturned to carry out our
intent. We have arranged with certain officials that the instant the



       *       *       *       *       *


but only the same story: "Not yet reported." Mina's morning and evening
hypnotic answer is unvaried: lapping waves, rushing water, and creaking




_Rufus Smith, Lloyd's, London, to Lord Godalming, care of H. B. M.


"_Czarina Catherine_ reported this morning from Dardanelles."




_25 October._--How I miss my phonograph! To write diary with a pen is

excitement yesterday when Godalming got his telegram from Lloyd's. I
know now what men feel in battle when the call to action is heard. Mrs.

all, it is not strange that she did not; for we took special care not to
let her know anything about it, and we all tried not to show any

sure, have noticed, no matter how we might have tried to conceal it; but
in this way she is greatly changed during the past three weeks. The
lethargy grows upon her, and though she seems strong and well, and is

talk of her often; we have not, however, said a word to the others. It
would break poor Harker's heart--certainly his nerve--if he knew that we

her teeth very carefully, whilst she is in the hypnotic condition, for
he says that so long as they do not begin to sharpen there is no active
danger of a change in her. If this change should come, it would be

be, though we do not mention our thoughts to each other. We should
neither of us shrink from the task--awful though it be to contemplate.

whoever invented it.


rate the _Czarina Catherine_ has come from London. She should therefore
arrive some time in the morning; but as she cannot possibly get in

o'clock, so as to be ready.



_25 October, Noon_.--No news yet of the ship's arrival. Mrs. Harker's

that we may get news at any moment. We men are all in a fever of
excitement, except Harker, who is calm; his hands are cold as ice, and
an hour ago I found him whetting the edge of the great Ghoorka knife

Count if the edge of that "Kukri" ever touches his throat, driven by


Van Helsing and I were a little alarmed about Mrs. Harker to-day. About
noon she got into a sort of lethargy which we did not like; although we

had been restless all the morning, so that we were at first glad to know
that she was sleeping. When, however, her husband mentioned casually

her room to see for ourselves. She was breathing naturally and looked so
well and peaceful that we agreed that the sleep was better for her than
anything else. Poor girl, she has so much to forget that it is no wonder


       *       *       *       *       *


of some hours she woke up, she seemed brighter and better than she had
been for days. At sunset she made the usual hypnotic report. Wherever he
may be in the Black Sea, the Count is hurrying to his destination. To




_26 October._--Another day and no tidings of the _Czarina Catherine_.
She ought to be here by now. That she is still journeying _somewhere_ is

same. It is possible that the vessel may be lying by, at times, for fog;
some of the steamers which came in last evening reported patches of fog

the ship may now be signalled any moment.



_27 October, Noon._--Most strange; no news yet of the ship we wait for.
Mrs. Harker reported last night and this morning as usual: "lapping

faint." The telegrams from London have been the same: "no further
report." Van Helsing is terribly anxious, and told me just now that he


"I did not like that lethargy of Madam Mina's. Souls and memories can do
strange things during trance." I was about to ask him more, but Harker

at sunset to make her speak more fully when in her hypnotic state.

       *       *       *       *       *


     care H. B. M. Vice Consul, Varna._





_Dr. Seward's Diary._


do not think it was such a shock to any of us as might have been
expected. True, we did not know whence, or how, or when, the bolt would
come; but I think we all expected that something strange would happen.

would not be just as we had expected; we only waited to learn where the
change would occur. None the less, however, was it a surprise. I suppose

ourselves that things will be as they ought to be, not as we should know
that they will be. Transcendentalism is a beacon to the angels, even if
it be a will-o'-the-wisp to man. It was an odd experience and we all

moment, as though in remonstrance with the Almighty; but he said not a
word, and in a few seconds stood up with his face sternly set. Lord

stunned and looked in wonder at one after another. Quincey Morris
tightened his belt with that quick movement which I knew so well; in our

that the scar on her forehead seemed to burn, but she folded her hands
meekly and looked up in prayer. Harker smiled--actually smiled--the
dark, bitter smile of one who is without hope; but at the same time his

the great Kukri knife and rested there. "When does the next train start


"At 6:30 to-morrow morning!" We all started, for the answer came from


"How on earth do you know?" said Art.


does Dr. Van Helsing--that I am the train fiend. At home in Exeter I
always used to make up the time-tables, so as to be helpful to my

the time-tables now. I knew that if anything were to take us to Castle
Dracula we should go by Galatz, or at any rate through Bucharest, so I
learned the times very carefully. Unhappily there are not many to learn,




"Can't we get a special?" asked Lord Godalming. Van Helsing shook his
head: "I fear not. This land is very different from yours or mine; even
if we did have a special, it would probably not arrive as soon as our

Now let us organize. You, friend Arthur, go to the train and get the
tickets and arrange that all be ready for us to go in the morning. Do

letters to the agent in Galatz, with authority to make search the ship
just as it was here. Morris Quincey, you see the Vice-Consul, and get

smooth, so that no times be lost when over the Danube. John will stay
with Madam Mina and me, and we shall consult. For so if time be long you
may be delayed; and it will not matter when the sun set, since I am here


"And I," said Mrs. Harker brightly, and more like her old self than she

shall think and write for you as I used to do. Something is shifting
from me in some strange way, and I feel freer than I have been of late!"

realise the significance of her words; but Van Helsing and I, turning to
each other, met each a grave and troubled glance. We said nothing at the


When the three men had gone out to their tasks Van Helsing asked Mrs.

Harker's journal at the Castle. She went away to get it; when the door
was shut upon her he said to me:--



"There is some change. It is a hope that makes me sick, for it may




"No!" said I, "unless it was to get an opportunity of seeing me alone."

"You are in part right, friend John, but only in part. I want to tell

but I believe it is right. In the moment when Madam Mina said those
words that arrest both our understanding, an inspiration came to me. In
the trance of three days ago the Count sent her his spirit to read her

with water rushing, just as it go free at rise and set of sun. He learn
then that we are here; for she have more to tell in her open life with

Now he make his most effort to escape us. At present he want her not.

"He is sure with his so great knowledge that she will come at his call;
but he cut her off--take her, as he can do, out of his own power, that

have been of man so long and that have not lost the grace of God, will
come higher than his child-brain that lie in his tomb for centuries,

therefore small. Here comes Madam Mina; not a word to her of her trance!
She know it not; and it would overwhelm her and make despair just when
we want all her hope, all her courage; when most we want all her great

a special power which the Count give her, and which he may not take away
altogether--though he think not so. Hush! let me speak, and you shall

feared before. We can only trust the good God. Silence! here she comes!"

I thought that the Professor was going to break down and have hysterics,
just as he had when Lucy died, but with a great effort he controlled

the room, bright and happy-looking and, in the doing of work, seemingly
forgetful of her misery. As she came in, she handed a number of sheets

brightening up as he read. Then holding the pages between his finger and


"Friend John, to you with so much of experience already--and you, too,
dear Madam Mina, that are young--here is a lesson: do not fear ever to

let him loose his wings. Here now, with more knowledge, I go back to
where that half-thought come from and I find that he be no half-thought
at all; that be a whole thought, though so young that he is not yet

Hans Andersen, he be no duck-thought at all, but a big swan-thought that
sail nobly on big wings, when the time come for him to try them. See I


"That other of his race who, in a later age, again and again, brought

beaten back, came again, and again, and again, though he had to come
alone from the bloody field where his troops were being slaughtered,


"What does this tell us? Not much? no! The Count's child-thought see
nothing; therefore he speak so free. Your man-thought see nothing; my

from some one who speak without thought because she, too, know not what
it mean--what it _might_ mean. Just as there are elements which rest,
yet when in nature's course they move on their way and they touch--then

and destroy some; but that show up all earth below for leagues and
leagues. Is it not so? Well, I shall explain. To begin, have you ever

a study of insanity. You, no, Madam Mina; for crime touch you not--not
but once. Still, your mind works true, and argues not _a particulari ad
universale_. There is this peculiarity in criminals. It is so constant,

from philosophy, come to know it empirically, that _it is_. That is to
be empiric. The criminal always work at one crime--that is the true

This criminal has not full man-brain. He is clever and cunning and
resourceful; but he be not of man-stature as to brain. He be of

also; he, too, have child-brain, and it is of the child to do what he
have done. The little bird, the little fish, the little animal learn not
by principle, but empirically; and when he learn to do, then there is to

Archimedes. 'Give me a fulcrum, and I shall move the world!' To do once,
is the fulcrum whereby child-brain become man-brain; and until he have

just as he have done before! Oh, my dear, I see that your eyes are
opened, and that to you the lightning flash show all the leagues," for


"Now you shall speak. Tell us two dry men of science what you see with
those so bright eyes." He took her hand and held it whilst she spoke.
His finger and thumb closed on her pulse, as I thought instinctively and


"The Count is a criminal and of criminal type. Nordau and Lombroso would

Thus, in a difficulty he has to seek resource in habit. His past is a
clue, and the one page of it that we know--and that from his own

'tight place,' he went back to his own country from the land he had
tried to invade, and thence, without losing purpose, prepared himself

So he came to London to invade a new land. He was beaten, and when all
hope of success was lost, and his existence in danger, he fled back over
the sea to his home; just as formerly he had fled back over the Danube



enthusiastically, as he stooped and kissed her hand. A moment later he
said to me, as calmly as though we had been having a sick-room


"Seventy-two only; and in all this excitement. I have hope." Turning to


"But go on. Go on! there is more to tell if you will. Be not afraid;

Speak, without fear!"



"Nay! fear not, you must be egotist, for it is of you that we think."

"Then, as he is criminal he is selfish; and as his intellect is small

purpose. That purpose is remorseless. As he fled back over the Danube,
leaving his forces to be cut to pieces, so now he is intent on being
safe, careless of all. So his own selfishness frees my soul somewhat

night. I felt it! Oh, I felt it! Thank God, for His great mercy! My soul
is freer than it has been since that awful hour; and all that haunts me

his ends." The Professor stood up:--


whilst the ship that carried him rushed through enveloping fog up to
Galatz, where, doubtless, he had made preparation for escaping from us.
But his child-mind only saw so far; and it may be that, as ever is in

his selfish good, turns out to be his chiefest harm. The hunter is taken
in his own snare, as the great Psalmist says. For now that he think he

many hours to him, then his selfish child-brain will whisper him to
sleep. He think, too, that as he cut himself off from knowing your mind,
there can be no knowledge of him to you; there is where he fail! That

in spirit, as you have as yet done in your times of freedom, when the
sun rise and set. At such times you go by my volition and not by his;

suffering at his hands. This is now all the more precious that he know
it not, and to guard himself have even cut himself off from his

that God is with us through all this blackness, and these many dark
hours. We shall follow him; and we shall not flinch; even if we peril

hour; and it have done much to advance us on our way. You must be scribe
and write him all down, so that when the others return from their work


And so I have written it whilst we wait their return, and Mrs. Harker
has written with her typewriter all since she brought the MS. to us.









_29 October._--This is written in the train from Varna to Galatz. Last
night we all assembled a little before the time of sunset. Each of us

and opportunity go, we are prepared for the whole of our journey, and
for our work when we get to Galatz. When the usual time came round Mrs.
Harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort; and after a longer and

necessary, she sank into the trance. Usually she speaks on a hint; but
this time the Professor had to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty


"I can see nothing; we are still; there are no waves lapping, but only a
steady swirl of water softly running against the hawser. I can hear
men's voices calling, near and far, and the roll and creak of oars in

There is tramping of feet overhead, and ropes and chains are dragged
along. What is this? There is a gleam of light; I can feel the air



on the sofa, and raised both her hands, palms upwards, as if lifting a
weight. Van Helsing and I looked at each other with understanding.
Quincey raised his eyebrows slightly and looked at her intently, whilst

was a long pause. We all knew that the time when she could speak was
passing; but we felt that it was useless to say anything. Suddenly she


"Would none of you like a cup of tea? You must all be so tired!" We
could only make her happy, and so acquiesced. She bustled off to get


"You see, my friends. _He_ is close to land: he has left his

hidden somewhere; but if he be not carried on shore, or if the ship do
not touch it, he cannot achieve the land. In such case he can, if it be

at Whitby. But if the day come before he get on shore, then, unless he
be carried he cannot escape. And if he be carried, then the customs men
may discover what the box contain. Thus, in fine, if he escape not on

We may then arrive in time; for if he escape not at night we shall come
on him in daytime, boxed up and at our mercy; for he dare not be his


There was no more to be said, so we waited in patience until the dawn;
at which time we might learn more from Mrs. Harker.


response in her trance. The hypnotic stage was even longer in coming
than before; and when it came the time remaining until full sunrise was

soul into the effort; at last, in obedience to his will she made


"All is dark. I hear lapping water, level with me, and some creaking as
of wood on wood." She paused, and the red sun shot up. We must wait till



expectation. We are due to arrive between two and three in the morning;
but already, at Bucharest, we are three hours late, so we cannot

hypnotic messages from Mrs. Harker; either or both may possibly throw


       *       *       *       *       *


there was no distraction; for had it occurred whilst we were at a
station, we might not have secured the necessary calm and isolation.
Mrs. Harker yielded to the hypnotic influence even less readily than

sensations may die away, just when we want it most. It seems to me that
her imagination is beginning to work. Whilst she has been in the trance

on it may ultimately mislead us. If I thought that the Count's power
over her would die away equally with her power of knowledge it would be

speak, her words were enigmatical:--

"Something is going out; I can feel it pass me like a cold wind. I can

fierce-falling water, and the howling of wolves." She stopped and a
shudder ran through her, increasing in intensity for a few seconds,

in answer to the Professor's imperative questioning. When she woke from
the trance, she was cold, and exhausted, and languid; but her mind was

when she was told, she pondered over it deeply for a long time and in


       *       *       *       *       *


to write later. Sunrise this morning was anxiously looked for by us all.
Knowing of the increasing difficulty of procuring the hypnotic trance,
Van Helsing began his passes earlier than usual. They produced no

greater difficulty, only a minute before the sun rose. The Professor
lost no time in his questioning; her answer came with equal quickness:--


creaking of wood on wood. Cattle low far off. There is another sound, a
queer one like----" She stopped and grew white, and whiter still.


voice. At the same time there was despair in his eyes, for the risen sun
was reddening even Mrs. Harker's pale face. She opened her eyes, and we
all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost



anything." Then, seeing the look of amazement on our faces, she said,
turning from one to the other with a troubled look:--


lying here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!'
It seemed so funny to hear you order me about, as if I were a bad


"Oh, Madam Mina," he said, sadly, "it is proof, if proof be needed, of

earnest than ever, can seem so strange because it is to order her whom I


The whistles are sounding; we are nearing Galatz. We are on fire with





_30 October._--Mr. Morris took me to the hotel where our rooms had been
ordered by telegraph, he being the one who could best be spared, since

much as they had been at Varna, except that Lord Godalming went to the
Vice-Consul, as his rank might serve as an immediate guarantee of some
sort to the official, we being in extreme hurry. Jonathan and the two

of the _Czarina Catherine_.



_Later._--Lord Godalming has returned. The Consul is away, and the

He was very obliging, and offered to do anything in his power.




_30 October._--At nine o'clock Dr. Van Helsing, Dr. Seward, and I called
on Messrs. Mackenzie & Steinkoff, the agents of the London firm of

Godalming's telegraphed request, asking us to show them any civility in
their power. They were more than kind and courteous, and took us at once
on board the _Czarina Catherine_, which lay at anchor out in the river

voyage. He said that in all his life he had never had so favourable a


"Man!" he said, "but it made us afeard, for we expeckit that we should

average. It's no canny to run frae London to the Black Sea wi' a wind
ahint ye, as though the Deil himself were blawin' on yer sail for his
ain purpose. An' a' the time we could no speer a thing. Gin we were nigh

till when after it had lifted and we looked out, the deil a thing could
we see. We ran by Gibraltar wi'oot bein' able to signal; an' till we

never were within hail o' aught. At first I inclined to slack off sail
and beat about till the fog was lifted; but whiles, I thocht that if the
Deil was minded to get us into the Black Sea quick, he was like to do it

miscredit wi' the owners, or no hurt to our traffic; an' the Old Mon who
had served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for no

and commercial reasoning, aroused Van Helsing, who said:--

"Mine friend, that Devil is more clever than he is thought by some; and

compliment, and went on:--


the Roumanians, came and asked me to heave overboard a big box which had
been put on board by a queer lookin' old man just before we had started
frae London. I had seen them speer at the fellow, and put out their twa

supersteetion of foreigners is pairfectly rideeculous! I sent them aboot
their business pretty quick; but as just after a fog closed in on us I

agin the big box. Well, on we went, and as the fog didn't let up for
five days I joost let the wind carry us; for if the Deil wanted to get
somewheres--well, he would fetch it up a'reet. An' if he didn't, well,

deep water all the time; and two days ago, when the mornin' sun came
through the fog, we found ourselves just in the river opposite Galatz.

box and fling it in the river. I had to argy wi' them aboot it wi' a
handspike; an' when the last o' them rose off the deck wi' his head in

property and the trust of my owners were better in my hands than in the
river Danube. They had, mind ye, taken the box on the deck ready to
fling in, and as it was marked Galatz _via_ Varna, I thocht I'd let it

didn't do much clearin' that day, an' had to remain the nicht at anchor;
but in the mornin', braw an' airly, an hour before sun-up, a man came

marked for one Count Dracula. Sure eneuch the matter was one ready to
his hand. He had his papers a' reet, an' glad I was to be rid o' the

did have any luggage aboord the ship, I'm thinkin' it was nane ither


"What was the name of the man who took it?" asked Dr. Van Helsing with


"I'll be tellin' ye quick!" he answered, and, stepping down to his
cabin, produced a receipt signed "Immanuel Hildesheim." Burgen-strasse

with thanks we came away.


Theatre type, with a nose like a sheep, and a fez. His arguments were
pointed with specie--we doing the punctuation--and with a little

important. He had received a letter from Mr. de Ville of London, telling
him to receive, if possible before sunrise so as to avoid customs, a box
which would arrive at Galatz in the _Czarina Catherine_. This he was to

who traded down the river to the port. He had been paid for his work by
an English bank note, which had been duly cashed for gold at the Danube

the ship and handed over the box, so as to save porterage. That was all


We then sought for Skinsky, but were unable to find him. One of his
neighbours, who did not seem to bear him any affection, said that he had

his landlord, who had received by messenger the key of the house
together with the rent due, in English money. This had been between ten


Whilst we were talking one came running and breathlessly gasped out that
the body of Skinsky had been found inside the wall of the churchyard of

animal. Those we had been speaking with ran off to see the horror, the
women crying out "This is the work of a Slovak!" We hurried away lest we
should have been in some way drawn into the affair, and so detained.


convinced that the box was on its way, by water, to somewhere; but where
that might be we would have to discover. With heavy hearts we came home


When we met together, the first thing was to consult as to taking Mina

least a chance, though a hazardous one. As a preliminary step, I was



_Mina Harker's Journal._


that there was nothing to be done till they had some rest; so I asked
them all to lie down for half an hour whilst I should enter everything

"Traveller's" typewriter, and to Mr. Morris for getting this one for
me. I should have felt quite; astray doing the work if I had to write


It is all done; poor dear, dear Jonathan, what he must have suffered,

breathe, and his whole body appears in collapse. His brows are knit; his
face is drawn with pain. Poor fellow, maybe he is thinking, and I can
see his face all wrinkled up with the concentration of his thoughts. Oh!


I have asked Dr. Van Helsing, and he has got me all the papers that I

carefully, and perhaps I may arrive at some conclusion. I shall try to
follow the Professor's example, and think without prejudice on the facts





shall get the maps and look over them....



I am more than ever sure that I am right. My new conclusion is ready, so

well to be accurate, and every minute is precious.




(Entered in her Journal.)




(_a_) He must be _brought back_ by some one. This is evident; for had he
power to move himself as he wished he could go either as man, or wolf,

interference, in the state of helplessness in which he must be--confined
as he is between dawn and sunset in his wooden box.


us. By road, by rail, by water?




(_x_) There are people; and people are curious, and investigate. A hint,
a surmise, a doubt as to what might be in the box, would destroy him.

(_y_) There are, or there may be, customs and octroi officers to pass.


to prevent his being betrayed he has repelled, so far as he can, even


2. _By Rail._--There is no one in charge of the box. It would have to
take its chance of being delayed; and delay would be fatal, with enemies

left in a strange place with no refuge that he could fly to? This is not
what he intends; and he does not mean to risk it.


danger in another. On the water he is powerless except at night; even
then he can only summon fog and storm and snow and his wolves. But were

indeed be lost. He could have the vessel drive to land; but if it were
unfriendly land, wherein he was not free to move, his position would


We know from the record that he was on the water; so what we have to do


The first thing is to realise exactly what he has done as yet; we may,


_Firstly._--We must differentiate between what he did in London as part
of his general plan of action, when he was pressed for moments and had


_Secondly_ we must see, as well as we can surmise it from the facts we


As to the first, he evidently intended to arrive at Galatz, and sent

exit from England; his immediate and sole purpose then was to escape.
The proof of this, is the letter of instructions sent to Immanuel
Hildesheim to clear and take away the box _before sunrise_. There is

there must have been some letter or message, since Skinsky came to


That, so far, his plans were successful we know. The _Czarina Catherine_

suspicions were aroused; but his superstition united with his canniness
played the Count's game for him, and he ran with his favouring wind
through fogs and all till he brought up blindfold at Galatz. That the

the box, took it off, and gave it to Skinsky. Skinsky took it--and here
we lose the trail. We only know that the box is somewhere on the water,

avoided.




The box was given to Skinsky before sunrise. At sunrise the Count could
appear in his own form. Here, we ask why Skinsky was chosen at all to
aid in the work? In my husband's diary, Skinsky is mentioned as dealing

remark, that the murder was the work of a Slovak, showed the general


My surmise is, this: that in London the Count decided to get back to his
castle by water, as the most safe and secret way. He was brought from
the castle by Szgany, and probably they delivered their cargo to Slovaks

Thus the Count had knowledge of the persons who could arrange this
service. When the box was on land, before sunrise or after sunset, he

arranging the carriage of the box up some river. When this was done, and
he knew that all was in train, he blotted out his traces, as he thought,


I have examined the map and find that the river most suitable for the
Slovaks to have ascended is either the Pruth or the Sereth. I read in

level with my ears and the creaking of wood. The Count in his box, then,
was on a river in an open boat--propelled probably either by oars or

would be no such sound if floating down stream.


possibly investigate further. Now of these two, the Pruth is the more
easily navigated, but the Sereth is, at Fundu, joined by the Bistritza
which runs up round the Borgo Pass. The loop it makes is manifestly as






others kept shaking me by both hands, and Dr. Van Helsing said:--

"Our dear Madam Mina is once more our teacher. Her eyes have been where

may succeed. Our enemy is at his most helpless; and if we can come on
him by day, on the water, our task will be over. He has a start, but he

him may suspect; for them to suspect would be to prompt them to throw
him in the stream where he perish. This he knows, and will not. Now men,
to our Council of War; for, here and now, we must plan what each and all




"And I, horses to follow on the bank lest by chance he land," said Mr.


"Good!" said the Professor, "both good. But neither must go alone. There
must be force to overcome force if need be; the Slovak is strong and

they carried a small arsenal. Said Mr. Morris:--

"I have brought some Winchesters; they are pretty handy in a crowd, and

precautions; he made some requisitions on others that Mrs. Harker could
not quite hear or understand. We must be ready at all points." Dr.



together, and we two, well armed, will be a match for whatever may come
along. You must not be alone, Art. It may be necessary to fight the
Slovaks, and a chance thrust--for I don't suppose these fellows carry

shall, not rest until the Count's head and body have been separated, and
we are sure that he cannot re-incarnate." He looked at Jonathan as he

torn about in his mind. Of course he wanted to be with me; but then the
boat service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the ...
the ... the ... Vampire. (Why did I hesitate to write the word?) He was


"Friend Jonathan, this is to you for twice reasons. First, because you
are young and brave and can fight, and all energies may be needed at the

wrought such woe to you and yours. Be not afraid for Madam Mina; she
will be my care, if I may. I am old. My legs are not so quick to run as

fight with lethal weapons. But I can be of other service; I can fight in
other way. And I can die, if need be, as well as younger men. Now let
me say that what I would is this: while you, my Lord Godalming and

whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be
landed, I will take Madam Mina right into the heart of the enemy's

stream whence he cannot escape to land--where he dares not raise the lid
of his coffin-box lest his Slovak carriers should in fear leave him to

over the Borgo, and find our way to the Castle of Dracula. Here, Madam
Mina's hypnotic power will surely help, and we shall find our way--all
dark and unknown otherwise--after the first sunrise when we are near

made sanctify, so that that nest of vipers be obliterated." Here


"Do you mean to say, Professor Van Helsing, that you would bring Mina,
in her sad case and tainted as she is with that devil's illness, right

Hell!" He became almost speechless for a minute, and then went on:--

"Do you know what the place is? Have you seen that awful den of hellish
infamy--with the very moonlight alive with grisly shapes, and every

Have you felt the Vampire's lips upon your throat?" Here he turned to
me, and as his eyes lit on my forehead he threw up his arms with a cry:

down on the sofa in a collapse of misery. The Professor's voice, as he
spoke in clear, sweet tones, which seemed to vibrate in the air, calmed


"Oh, my friend, it is because I would save Madam Mina from that awful

place. There is work--wild work--to be done there, that her eyes may not
see. We men here, all save Jonathan, have seen with their own eyes what

terrible straits. If the Count escape us this time--and he is strong and
subtle and cunning--he may choose to sleep him for a century, and then
in time our dear one"--he took my hand--"would come to him to keep him

told us of their gloating lips; you heard their ribald laugh as they
clutched the moving bag that the Count threw to them. You shudder; and

necessary. My friend, is it not a dire need for the which I am giving,
possibly my life? If it were that any one went into that place to stay,


"Do as you will," said Jonathan, with a sob that shook him all over, "we


       *       *       *       *       *


How can women help loving men when they are so earnest, and so true, and
so brave! And, too, it made me think of the wonderful power of money!
What can it not do when it is properly applied; and what might it do

that both he and Mr. Morris, who also has plenty of money, are willing
to spend it so freely. For if they did not, our little expedition could

another hour. It is not three hours since it was arranged what part each
of us was to do; and now Lord Godalming and Jonathan have a lovely steam
launch, with steam up ready to start at a moment's notice. Dr. Seward

all the maps and appliances of various kinds that can be had. Professor
Van Helsing and I are to leave by the 11:40 train to-night for Veresti,

bringing a good deal of ready money, as we are to buy a carriage and
horses. We shall drive ourselves, for we have no one whom we can trust

so we shall get on all right. We have all got arms, even for me a
large-bore revolver; Jonathan would not be happy unless I was armed like
the rest. Alas! I cannot carry one arm that the rest do; the scar on my

that I am fully armed as there may be wolves; the weather is getting
colder every hour, and there are snow-flurries which come and go as




_Later._--It took all my courage to say good-bye to my darling. We may
never meet again. Courage, Mina! the Professor is looking at you keenly;

God will let them fall in gladness.




_October 30. Night._--I am writing this in the light from the furnace

experienced hand at the work, as he has had for years a launch of his
own on the Thames, and another on the Norfolk Broads. Regarding our

waterway was chosen for the Count's escape back to his Castle, the
Sereth and then the Bistritza at its junction, would be the one. We took
it, that somewhere about the 47th degree, north latitude, would be the

Carpathians. We have no fear in running at good speed up the river at
night; there is plenty of water, and the banks are wide enough apart to

sleep for a while, as it is enough for the present for one to be on
watch. But I cannot sleep--how can I with the terrible danger hanging
over my darling, and her going out into that awful place.... My only

be easier to die than to live, and so be quit of all the trouble. Mr.
Morris and Dr. Seward were off on their long ride before we started;

lands where they can see a good stretch of river and avoid the following
of its curves. They have, for the first stages, two men to ride and lead

they dismiss the men, which shall be shortly, they shall themselves look
after the horses. It may be necessary for us to join forces; if so they
can mount our whole party. One of the saddles has a movable horn, and


It is a wild adventure we are on. Here, as we are rushing along through
the darkness, with the cold from the river seeming to rise up and strike

home. We seem to be drifting into unknown places and unknown ways; into
a whole world of dark and dreadful things. Godalming is shutting the




_31 October._--Still hurrying along. The day has come, and Godalming is
sleeping. I am on watch. The morning is bitterly cold; the furnace heat

a few open boats, but none of them had on board any box or package of
anything like the size of the one we seek. The men were scared every

prayed.



_1 November, evening._--No news all day; we have found nothing of the

in our surmise our chance is gone. We have over-hauled every boat, big
and little. Early this morning, one crew took us for a Government boat,
and treated us accordingly. We saw in this a way of smoothing matters,

Roumanian flag which we now fly conspicuously. With every boat which we
have over-hauled since then this trick has succeeded; we have had every

to ask or do. Some of the Slovaks tell us that a big boat passed them,
going at more than usual speed as she had a double crew on board. This

boat turned into the Bistritza or continued on up the Sereth. At Fundu
we could not hear of any such boat, so she must have passed there in the
night. I am feeling very sleepy; the cold is perhaps beginning to tell

shall keep the first watch. God bless him for all his goodness to poor


       *       *       *       *       *


wake me. He says it would have been a sin to, for I slept peacefully and
was forgetting my trouble. It seems brutally selfish to me to have slept
so long, and let him watch all night; but he was quite right. I am a new

all that is necessary both as to minding the engine, steering, and
keeping watch. I can feel that my strength and energy are coming back to

Veresti about noon on Wednesday. It would take them some time to get the
carriage and horses; so if they had started and travelled hard, they
would be about now at the Borgo Pass. God guide and help them! I am

cannot; the engines are throbbing and doing their utmost. I wonder how
Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris are getting on. There seem to be endless

are very large--at present, at all events, though they are terrible
doubtless in winter and when the snow melts--the horsemen may not have

them; for if by that time we have not overtaken the Count, it may be
necessary to take counsel together what to do next.




_2 November._--Three days on the road. No news, and no time to write it

rest needful for the horses; but we are both bearing it wonderfully.
Those adventurous days of ours are turning up useful. We must push on;


       *       *       *       *       *


Bistritza. I wish it wasn't so cold. There are signs of snow coming; and
if it falls heavy it will stop us. In such case we must get a sledge and


       *       *       *       *       *


accident when trying to force a way up the rapids. The Slovak boats get
up all right, by aid of a rope and steering with knowledge. Some went up

evidently it was he who put the launch in trim again. Finally, they got
up the rapids all right, with local help, and are off on the chase

peasantry tell us that after she got upon smooth water again, she kept
stopping every now and again so long as she was in sight. We must push



_Mina Harker's Journal._


this morning at dawn he could hardly hypnotise me at all, and that all I
could say was: "dark and quiet." He is off now buying a carriage and
horses. He says that he will later on try to buy additional horses, so

than 70 miles before us. The country is lovely, and most interesting; if
only we were under different conditions, how delightful it would be to

pleasure it would be. To stop and see people, and learn something of
their life, and to fill our minds and memories with all the colour and

people! But, alas!--



_Later._--Dr. Van Helsing has returned. He has got the carriage and

landlady is putting us up a huge basket of provisions; it seems enough
for a company of soldiers. The Professor encourages her, and whispers to
me that it may be a week before we can get any good food again. He has

and wraps, and all sorts of warm things. There will not be any chance of


       *       *       *       *       *


truly in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be, and I pray Him,
with all the strength of my sad and humble soul, that He will watch over

loved him and honoured him more than I can say, and that my latest and
truest thought will be always for him.









_1 November._--All day long we have travelled, and at a good speed. The

willingly their full stage at best speed. We have now had so many
changes and find the same thing so constantly that we are encouraged to

he tells the farmers that he is hurrying to Bistritz, and pays them well
to make the exchange of horses. We get hot soup, or coffee, or tea; and
off we go. It is a lovely country; full of beauties of all imaginable

of nice qualities. They are _very, very_ superstitious. In the first
house where we stopped, when the woman who served us saw the scar on my

keep off the evil eye. I believe they went to the trouble of putting an
extra amount of garlic into our food; and I can't abide garlic. Ever
since then I have taken care not to take off my hat or veil, and so have

driver with us to carry tales, we go ahead of scandal; but I daresay
that fear of the evil eye will follow hard behind us all the way. The

made me sleep for a long spell. At sunset time he hypnotised me, and he
says that I answered as usual "darkness, lapping water and creaking

Jonathan, but somehow I have now no fear for him, or for myself. I write
this whilst we wait in a farmhouse for the horses to be got ready. Dr.
Van Helsing is sleeping, Poor dear, he looks very tired and old and

he is instinct with resolution. When we have well started I must make
him rest whilst I drive. I shall tell him that we have days before us,

needed.... All is ready; we are off shortly.



_2 November, morning._--I was successful, and we took turns driving all
night; now the day is on us, bright though cold. There is a strange

that it oppresses us both. It is very cold, and only our warm furs keep
us comfortable. At dawn Van Helsing hypnotised me; he says I answered

they ascend. I do hope that my darling will not run any chance of
danger--more than need be; but we are in God's hands.



_2 November, night._--All day long driving. The country gets wilder as
we go, and the great spurs of the Carpathians, which at Veresti seemed

and tower in front. We both seem in good spirits; I think we make an
effort each to cheer the other; in the doing so we cheer ourselves. Dr.

houses are very few here now, and the Professor says that the last horse
we got will have to go on with us, as we may not be able to change. He

four-in-hand. The dear horses are patient and good, and they give us no
trouble. We are not worried with other travellers, and so even I can
drive. We shall get to the Pass in daylight; we do not want to arrive

will to-morrow bring to us? We go to seek the place where my poor
darling suffered so much. God grant that we may be guided aright, and

and who are in such deadly peril. As for me, I am not worthy in His
sight. Alas! I am unclean to His eyes, and shall be until He may deign

His wrath.




_4 November._--This to my old and true friend John Seward, M.D., of

morning, and I write by a fire which all the night I have kept
alive--Madam Mina aiding me. It is cold, cold; so cold that the grey

winter as the ground is hardening to receive it. It seems to have
affected Madam Mina; she has been so heavy of head all day that she was

so alert, have done literally nothing all the day; she even have lost
her appetite. She make no entry into her little diary, she who write so
faithful at every pause. Something whisper to me that all is not well.

and restore her, for now she is all sweet and bright as ever. At sunset
I try to hypnotise her, but alas! with no effect; the power has grown

God's will be done--whatever it may be, and whithersoever it may lead!

Now to the historical, for as Madam Mina write not in her stenography, I
must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so each day of us may not go



saw the signs of the dawn I got ready for the hypnotism. We stopped our
carriage, and got down so that there might be no disturbance. I made a
couch with furs, and Madam Mina, lying down, yield herself as usual, but

before, came the answer: "darkness and the swirling of water." Then she
woke, bright and radiant and we go on our way and soon reach the Pass.

guiding power be in her manifested, for she point to a road and say:--





"Of course I know it," she answer, and with a pause, add: "Have not my
Jonathan travelled it and wrote of his travel?"


such by-road. It is used but little, and very different from the coach
road from the Bukovina to Bistritz, which is more wide and hard, and


So we came down this road; when we meet other ways--not always were we

have fallen--the horses know and they only. I give rein to them, and
they go on so patient. By-and-by we find all the things which Jonathan

hours and hours. At the first, I tell Madam Mina to sleep; she try, and
she succeed. She sleep all the time; till at the last, I feel myself to
suspicious grow, and attempt to wake her. But she sleep on, and I may

her; for I know that she have suffer much, and sleep at times be
all-in-all to her. I think I drowse myself, for all of sudden I feel

reins in my hand, and the good horses go along jog, jog, just as ever. I
look down and find Madam Mina still sleep. It is now not far off sunset
time, and over the snow the light of the sun flow in big yellow flood,

For we are going up, and up; and all is oh! so wild and rocky, as though


Then I arouse Madam Mina. This time she wake with not much trouble, and
then I try to put her to hypnotic sleep. But she sleep not, being as

myself in dark; so I look round, and find that the sun have gone down.
Madam Mina laugh, and I turn and look at her. She is now quite awake,
and look so well as I never saw her since that night at Carfax when we

is so bright and tender and thoughtful for me that I forget all fear. I
light a fire, for we have brought supply of wood with us, and she

to feed. Then when I return to the fire she have my supper ready. I go
to help her; but she smile, and tell me that she have eat already--that

grave doubts; but I fear to affright her, and so I am silent of it. She
help me and I eat alone; and then we wrap in fur and lie beside the
fire, and I tell her to sleep while I watch. But presently I forget all

quiet, but awake, and looking at me with so bright eyes. Once, twice
more the same occur, and I get much sleep till before morning. When I

obedient, she may not sleep. The sun rise up, and up, and up; and then
sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will not wake. I have

harnessed the horses and made all ready. Madam still sleep, and she look
in her sleep more healthy and more redder than before. And I like it
not. And I am afraid, afraid, afraid!--I am afraid of all things--even

death, or more than these, and we must not flinch.



_5 November, morning._--Let me be accurate in everything, for though you
and I have seen some strange things together, you may at the first think

strain on nerves has at the last turn my brain.


moving into a more and more wild and desert land. There are great,
frowning precipices and much falling water, and Nature seem to have held
sometime her carnival. Madam Mina still sleep and sleep; and though I

began to fear that the fatal spell of the place was upon her, tainted as
she is with that Vampire baptism. "Well," said I to myself, "if it be

night." As we travel on the rough road, for a road of an ancient and
imperfect kind there was, I held down my head and slept. Again I waked
with a sense of guilt and of time passed, and found Madam Mina still

mountains seemed further away, and we were near the top of a
steep-rising hill, on summit of which was such a castle as Jonathan tell



I woke Madam Mina, and again tried to hypnotise her; but alas!
unavailing till too late. Then, ere the great dark came upon us--for
even after down-sun the heavens reflected the gone sun on the snow, and

them in what shelter I could. Then I make a fire; and near it I make
Madam Mina, now awake and more charming than ever, sit comfortable amid

she had not hunger. I did not press her, knowing her unavailingness. But
I myself eat, for I must needs now be strong for all. Then, with the

where Madam Mina sat; and over the ring I passed some of the wafer, and
I broke it fine so that all was well guarded. She sat still all the
time--so still as one dead; and she grew whiter and ever whiter till the

clung to me, and I could know that the poor soul shook her from head to
feet with a tremor that was pain to feel. I said to her presently, when


"Will you not come over to the fire?" for I wished to make a test of

stopped, and stood as one stricken.

"Why not go on?" I asked. She shook her head, and, coming back, sat

from sleep, she said simply:--


could not, none of those that we dreaded could. Though there might be


Presently the horses began to scream, and tore at their tethers till I
came to them and quieted them. When they did feel my hands on them, they

time. Many times through the night did I come to them, till it arrive to
the cold hour when all nature is at lowest; and every time my coming was
with quiet of them. In the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was

sweeps and with it a chill mist. Even in the dark there was a light of
some kind, as there ever is over snow; and it seemed as though the

trailing garments. All was in dead, grim silence only that the horses
whinnied and cowered, as if in terror of the worst. I began to

ring wherein I stood. I began, too, to think that my imaginings were of
the night, and the gloom, and the unrest that I have gone through, and
all the terrible anxiety. It was as though my memories of all Jonathan's

began to wheel and circle round, till I could get as though a shadowy
glimpse of those women that would have kissed him. And then the horses

the madness of fright was not to them, so that they could break away. I
feared for my dear Madam Mina when these weird figures drew near and
circled round. I looked at her, but she sat calm, and smiled at me; when

me back, and whispered, like a voice that one hears in a dream, so low


"No! No! Do not go without. Here you are safe!" I turned to her, and


"But you? It is for you that I fear!" whereat she laughed--a laugh, low


"Fear for _me_! Why fear for me? None safer in all the world from them

wind made the flame leap up, and I see the red scar on her forehead.
Then, alas! I knew. Did I not, I would soon have learned, for the
wheeling figures of mist and snow came closer, but keeping ever without

take away my reason, for I saw it through my eyes--there were before me
in actual flesh the same three women that Jonathan saw in the room, when

bright hard eyes, the white teeth, the ruddy colour, the voluptuous
lips. They smiled ever at poor dear Madam Mina; and as their laugh came

her, and said in those so sweet tingling tones that Jonathan said were
of the intolerable sweetness of the water-glasses:--


Madam Mina, and my heart with gladness leapt like flame; for oh! the
terror in her sweet eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my
heart that was all of hope. God be thanked she was not, yet, of them. I

Wafer, advanced on them towards the fire. They drew back before me, and
laughed their low horrid laugh. I fed the fire, and feared them not; for

approach, me, whilst so armed, nor Madam Mina whilst she remained within
the ring, which she could not leave no more than they could enter. The
horses had ceased to moan, and lay still on the ground; the snow fell on

beasts no more of terror.


snow-gloom. I was desolate and afraid, and full of woe and terror; but
when that beautiful sun began to climb the horizon life was to me again.

whirling mist and snow; the wreaths of transparent gloom moved away


Instinctively, with the dawn coming, I turned to Madam Mina, intending
to hypnotise her; but she lay in a deep and sudden sleep, from which I

no response, none at all; and the day broke. I fear yet to stir. I have
made my fire and have seen the horses, they are all dead. To-day I have
much to do here, and I keep waiting till the sun is up high; for there

obscure it, will be to me a safety.


work. Madam Mina still sleeps; and, God be thanked! she is calm in her





_4 November, evening._--The accident to the launch has been a terrible
thing for us. Only for it we should have overtaken the boat long ago;
and by now my dear Mina would have been free. I fear to think of her,

follow on the track. I note this whilst Godalming is getting ready. We
have our arms. The Szgany must look out if they mean fight. Oh, if only

Good-bye, Mina! God bless and keep you.




_5 November._--With the dawn we saw the body of Szgany before us dashing

cluster, and hurried along as though beset. The snow is falling lightly
and there is a strange excitement in the air. It may be our own
feelings, but the depression is strange. Far off I hear the howling of

dangers to all of us, and from all sides. The horses are nearly ready,
and we are soon off. We ride to death of some one. God alone knows who,






at all events, though the proving it has been dreadful. When I left
Madam Mina sleeping within the Holy circle, I took my way to the castle.

useful; though the doors were all open I broke them off the rusty
hinges, lest some ill-intent or ill-chance should close them, so that

me here. By memory of his diary I found my way to the old chapel, for I
knew that here my work lay. The air was oppressive; it seemed as if

there was a roaring in my ears or I heard afar off the howl of wolves.
Then I bethought me of my dear Madam Mina, and I was in terrible plight.


Her, I had not dare to take into this place, but left safe from the
Vampire in that Holy circle; and yet even there would be the wolf! I

submit, if it were God's will. At any rate it was only death and
freedom beyond. So did I choose for her. Had it but been for myself the

the grave of the Vampire! So I make my choice to go on with my work.

I knew that there were at least three graves to find--graves that are
inhabit; so I search, and search, and I find one of them. She lay in her

though I have come to do murder. Ah, I doubt not that in old time, when
such things were, many a man who set forth to do such a task as mine,

and delay, and delay, till the mere beauty and the fascination of the
wanton Un-Dead have hypnotise him; and he remain on and on, till sunset
come, and the Vampire sleep be over. Then the beautiful eyes of the fair

kiss--and man is weak. And there remain one more victim in the Vampire
fold; one more to swell the grim and grisly ranks of the Un-Dead!...


of such an one, even lying as she lay in a tomb fretted with age and
heavy with the dust of centuries, though there be that horrid odour such

with all my purpose and with my motive for hate--I was moved to a
yearning for delay which seemed to paralyse my faculties and to clog my

strange oppression of the air were beginning to overcome me. Certain it
was that I was lapsing into sleep, the open-eyed sleep of one who yields
to a sweet fascination, when there came through the snow-stilled air a

of a clarion. For it was the voice of my dear Madam Mina that I heard.

Then I braced myself again to my horrid task, and found by wrenching

pause to look on her as I had on her sister, lest once more I should
begin to be enthrall; but I go on searching until, presently, I find in
a high great tomb as if made to one much beloved that other fair sister

the mist. She was so fair to look on, so radiantly beautiful, so
exquisitely voluptuous, that the very instinct of man in me, which calls

with new emotion. But God be thanked, that soul-wail of my dear Madam
Mina had not died out of my ears; and, before the spell could be wrought
further upon me, I had nerved myself to my wild work. By this time I had

there had been only three of these Un-Dead phantoms around us in the
night, I took it that there were no more of active Un-Dead existent.

nobly proportioned. On it was but one word



This then was the Un-Dead home of the King-Vampire, to whom so many more
were due. Its emptiness spoke eloquent to make certain what I knew.

awful work, I laid in Dracula's tomb some of the Wafer, and so banished


Then began my terrible task, and I dreaded it. Had it been but one, it
had been easy, comparative. But three! To begin twice more after I had

Miss Lucy, what would it not be with these strange ones who had survived
through centuries, and who had been strengthened by the passing of the
years; who would, if they could, have fought for their foul lives....


thoughts of other dead, and of the living over whom hung such a pall of
fear, I could not have gone on. I tremble and tremble even yet, though

the repose in the first place, and the gladness that stole over it just
ere the final dissolution came, as realisation that the soul had been
won, I could not have gone further with my butchery. I could not have

writhing form, and lips of bloody foam. I should have fled in terror and
left my work undone. But it is over! And the poor souls, I can pity them

for a short moment ere fading. For, friend John, hardly had my knife
severed the head of each, before the whole body began to melt away and
crumble in to its native dust, as though the death that should have come



Before I left the castle I so fixed its entrances that never more can


When I stepped into the circle where Madam Mina slept, she woke from her
sleep, and, seeing, me, cried out in pain that I had endured too much.

"Come!" she said, "come away from this awful place! Let us go to meet my

pale and weak; but her eyes were pure and glowed with fervour. I was
glad to see her paleness and her illness, for my mind was full of the


And so with trust and hope, and yet full of fear, we go eastward to meet
our friends--and _him_--whom Madam Mina tell me that she _know_ are





_6 November._--It was late in the afternoon when the Professor and I

not go fast, though the way was steeply downhill, for we had to take
heavy rugs and wraps with us; we dared not face the possibility of being
left without warmth in the cold and the snow. We had to take some of our

could see through the snowfall, there was not even the sign of
habitation. When we had gone about a mile, I was tired with the heavy

clear line of Dracula's castle cut the sky; for we were so deep under
the hill whereon it was set that the angle of perspective of the

perched a thousand feet on the summit of a sheer precipice, and with
seemingly a great gap between it and the steep of the adjacent mountain

could hear the distant howling of wolves. They were far off, but the
sound, even though coming muffled through the deadening snowfall, was
full of terror. I knew from the way Dr. Van Helsing was searching about

exposed in case of attack. The rough roadway still led downwards; we


In a little while the Professor signalled to me, so I got up and joined
him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of natural hollow in a rock,
with an entrance like a doorway between two boulders. He took me by the

if the wolves do come I can meet them one by one." He brought in our
furs, and made a snug nest for me, and got out some provisions and

repulsive to me, and, much as I would have liked to please him, I could
not bring myself to the attempt. He looked very sad, but did not

of the rock, and began to search the horizon. Suddenly he called out:--

"Look! Madam Mina, look! look!" I sprang up and stood beside him on the
rock; he handed me his glasses and pointed. The snow was now falling

to blow. However, there were times when there were pauses between the
snow flurries and I could see a long way round. From the height where we

white waste of snow, I could see the river lying like a black ribbon in
kinks and curls as it wound its way. Straight in front of us and not far
off--in fact, so near that I wondered we had not noticed before--came a

long leiter-wagon which swept from side to side, like a dog's tail
wagging, with each stern inequality of the road. Outlined against the

peasants or gypsies of some kind.


felt that the end was coming. The evening was now drawing close, and
well I knew that at sunset the Thing, which was till then imprisoned
there, would take new freedom and could in any of many forms elude all

however, he was not there. An instant later, I saw him below me. Round
the rock he had drawn a circle, such as we had found shelter in last


"At least you shall be safe here from _him_!" He took the glasses from
me, and at the next lull of the snow swept the whole space below us.

galloping as hard as they can." He paused and went on in a hollow


"They are racing for the sunset. We may be too late. God's will be

landscape was blotted out. It soon passed, however, and once more his
glasses were fixed on the plain. Then came a sudden cry:--


south. It must be Quincey and John. Take the glass. Look before the snow
blots it all out!" I took it and looked. The two men might be Dr. Seward
and Mr. Morris. I knew at all events that neither of them was Jonathan.

I saw on the north side of the coming party two other men, riding at
break-neck speed. One of them I knew was Jonathan, and the other I took,
of course, to be Lord Godalming. They, too, were pursuing the party with

and, after looking intently till a snow fall made sight impossible, he
laid his Winchester rifle ready for use against the boulder at the

time comes we shall have gypsies on all sides." I got out my revolver
ready to hand, for whilst we were speaking the howling of wolves came

It was strange to see the snow falling in such heavy flakes close to us,
and beyond, the sun shining more and more brightly as it sank down
towards the far mountain tops. Sweeping the glass all around us I could

numbers--the wolves were gathering for their prey.


fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with fury as it swept upon us in
circling eddies. At times we could not see an arm's length before us;
but at others, as the hollow-sounding wind swept by us, it seemed to

late been so accustomed to watch for sunrise and sunset, that we knew
with fair accuracy when it would be; and we knew that before long the

than an hour that we waited in that rocky shelter before the various
bodies began to converge close upon us. The wind came now with fiercer
and more bitter sweeps, and more steadily from the north. It seemingly

the snow fell. We could distinguish clearly the individuals of each
party, the pursued and the pursuers. Strangely enough those pursued did

seemed, however, to hasten with redoubled speed as the sun dropped lower


Closer and closer they drew. The Professor and I crouched down behind
our rock, and held our weapons ready; I could see that he was determined

presence.


raised in a high key of passion; the other Mr. Morris' strong resolute
tone of quiet command. The gypsies may not have known the language, but

spoken. Instinctively they reined in, and at the instant Lord Godalming
and Jonathan dashed up at one side and Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris on the
other. The leader of the gypsies, a splendid-looking fellow who sat his

companions some word to proceed. They lashed the horses which sprang
forward; but the four men raised their Winchester rifles, and in an

Helsing and I rose behind the rock and pointed our weapons at them.
Seeing that they were surrounded the men tightened their reins and drew

gypsy party drew what weapon he carried, knife or pistol, and held
himself in readiness to attack. Issue was joined in an instant.


front, and pointing first to the sun--now close down on the hill
tops--and then to the castle, said something which I did not understand.
For answer, all four men of our party threw themselves from their horses

Jonathan in such danger, but that the ardour of battle must have been
upon me as well as the rest of them; I felt no fear, but only a wild,

parties, the leader of the gypsies gave a command; his men instantly
formed round the cart in a sort of undisciplined endeavour, each one



In the midst of this I could see that Jonathan on one side of the ring
of men, and Quincey on the other, were forcing a way to the cart; it was
evident that they were bent on finishing their task before the sun

levelled weapons nor the flashing knives of the gypsies in front, nor
the howling of the wolves behind, appeared to even attract their

purpose, seemed to overawe those in front of him; instinctively they
cowered, aside and let him pass. In an instant he had jumped upon the

box, and flung it over the wheel to the ground. In the meantime, Mr.
Morris had had to use force to pass through his side of the ring of
Szgany. All the time I had been breathlessly watching Jonathan I had,

seen the knives of the gypsies flash as he won a way through them, and
they cut at him. He had parried with his great bowie knife, and at first

beside Jonathan, who had by now jumped from the cart, I could see that
with his left hand he was clutching at his side, and that the blood was

as Jonathan, with desperate energy, attacked one end of the chest,
attempting to prize off the lid with his great Kukri knife, he attacked
the other frantically with his bowie. Under the efforts of both men the

the top of the box was thrown back.


and at the mercy of Lord Godalming and Dr. Seward, had given in and made
no resistance. The sun was almost down on the mountain tops, and the

lying within the box upon the earth, some of which the rude falling from
the cart had scattered over him. He was deathly pale, just like a waxen
image, and the red eyes glared with the horrible vindictive look which I


As I looked, the eyes saw the sinking sun, and the look of hate in them



I shrieked as I saw it shear through the throat; whilst at the same
moment Mr. Morris's bowie knife plunged into the heart.


drawing of a breath, the whole body crumble into dust and passed from


I shall be glad as long as I live that even in that moment of final
dissolution, there was in the face a look of peace, such as I never


The Castle of Dracula now stood out against the red sky, and every stone

setting sun.


disappearance of the dead man, turned, without a word, and rode away as
if for their lives. Those who were unmounted jumped upon the

which had withdrawn to a safe distance, followed in their wake, leaving


Mr. Morris, who had sunk to the ground, leaned on his elbow, holding his
hand pressed to his side; the blood still gushed through his fingers. I

two doctors. Jonathan knelt behind him and the wounded man laid back his
head on his shoulder. With a sigh he took, with a feeble effort, my hand
in that of his own which was unstained. He must have seen the anguish of


"I am only too happy to have been of any service! Oh, God!" he cried

worth for this to die! Look! look!"

The sun was now right down upon the mountain top, and the red gleams

the men sank on their knees and a deep and earnest "Amen" broke from all
as their eyes followed the pointing of his finger. The dying man



more stainless than her forehead! The curse has passed away!"

And, to our bitter grief, with a smile and in silence, he died, a




